---
Pr-id: The Internet Revolution: From Dotcom Capitalism to Cybernetic Communism
P-id: Network Notebooks
A-id: 10
Type: essay
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 10
Article-title: The Internet Revolution: From Dotcom Capitalism to Cybernetic Communism
Article-status: accepted
Author: Richard Barbrook 
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...





Dedicated to Andy Cameron

1959-2012

Friend, colleague and inspiration


*The Compañero Presidente says: “Government* is *the people.”*

*The wishes of the people will be made known to the government at all
times.*

*We will use TECHNOLOGY, which belongs to the people, to do it.*

Stafford Beer, *Brain of the Firm*



<!--
# CONTENTS

Richard Barbrook

The Owl of Minerva Flies at Dusk


Richard Barbrook & Andy Cameron

The Californian Ideology

Richard Barbrook

Cyber-Communism: How the Americans Are Superseding
Capitalism in Cyberspace
-->




# The Owl of Minerva Flies at Dusk

<p class="author">Richard Barbrook</p>

*...we have no future. (...) Fully imagined futures were the luxury of
another day, one in which ‘now’ was of some greater duration. For us, of
course, things change so abruptly, so violently, so profoundly, that
futures like our grandparents’ have insufficient “now” to stand on. We
have no future because our present is too volatile.*

William Gibson, *Pattern Recognition*


Welcome to the corporeal past of the virtual future! This pamphlet
contains two essays written during the 1990s when the Net first became
an essential part of everyday life. Nowadays, as citizens of
post-industrial societies, we take it for granted that we can use our
computers to communicate and share information with people across the
world. Crucially, for the 20-something students who I teach at the
University of Westminster, the Net has always been there. They find it
difficult to comprehend how their parents’ generation could have ever
socialised, worked, shopped or agitated without the aid of PCs, laptops,
tablets and mobile phones. Not surprisingly, their sense of self is
constructed through a digital identity. They fall in love – and tell
everyone by updating their Facebook status. They have to write an essay
– and begin by consulting Wikipedia. They are outraged by a political
crisis – and protest with a flurry of Twitter messages. They decide to
watch a movie – and immediately download it with BitTorrent. They go
partying with their friends – and then send funny photos of the evening
to them using SnapChat. They discover a new style of music – and are
soon listening to its proponents on SoundCloud. They have close
relatives in faraway countries – and always keep in touch through Skype.
As one of my students recently told me, the Net isn’t a magical
technology when you’ve had the same email address since you were twelve.
She is undoubtedly correct. Like water, power or transport,
computer-mediated communications has become a public utility: the
precondition of social existence. When all of your friends and family
are online, interactivity is banality.

By reading this book, you are travelling back to a very different time
when the Net was still a magical technology. At the beginning of the
1990s, France was the only country on the planet where people outside
the academy had easy access to computer-mediated communications. By
distributing the terminals of its Minitel system for free, the
nationalised telephone company had created the infrastructure for a
multiplicity of online services. On a visit to Paris in 1984, I was
amazed by the potential of this precursor of the Net. My techie friends
in London were using bulletin boards to communicate with each other, but
these digital hang-outs were solely for computer geeks. In contrast, the
Minitel system had been designed so that anyone who was able to afford
its premium phone lines could access this computer network. Despite the
simple interface and limited bandwidth, its subscribers pioneered many
of the services which would later flourish on the Net: real-time
information, virtual communities and e-commerce. For years after my
Paris trip, I was convinced that the Minitel system would sooner or
later be launched in England. Unfortunately, after its privatisation by
Margaret Thatcher’s neoliberal government in 1984, British Telecom was
much more interested in making easy money out of installing broadband
connections for the City of London’s financial institutions than
engaging in an expensive long-term investment in network computing for
the masses. While my French friends were happily chatting, flirting,
politicking and shopping on Minitel, anyone who wasn’t a techie in 1980s
England remained excluded from the virtual world. Like high-speed
railways, computer-mediated communications was strictly for continental
Europeans.

As its name suggests, the first essay in this pamphlet – *The
Californian Ideology* – was written in response to the different path to
the digital future taken in early-1990s England. Despite British
Telecom’s retrograde policies, the falling prices of PCs and modems had
enabled a growing number of people who weren’t working or studying at a
university to access online services. Like Minitel users in France,
these early adopters of the Net were not deterred by the command lines
and slow speeds of the wonderful technology which enabled them to send
emails, participate in newsgroups and share files with each other. When
the Mosaic web browser was released in 1993, its point-and-click
graphical interface catalysed the rapid transformation of this esoteric
hobby into a mass phenomenon. Unlike the simple terminals of Minitel,
the Net would be built upon the greater processing power of the PC.
Within a few years, its users were able to download not only text files,
but also graphics, sound and video. At long last, the English could now
participate within virtual communities, contribute to online forums and
carry out e-commerce. In September 1994, I was among the boisterous
crowd at the launch party of the world’s first cybercafé: Cyberia. A
decade earlier, I’d seen the digital future in Paris. Looking at the PCs
lined up around the room, I now understood that the shape of things to
come had finally arrived in London. Most gratifyingly, I’d been proved
right that the English would embrace network computing with enthusiasm.
Yet, I’d also been convinced that this new technology would be imported
from France. How wrong I’d been in my assumption. Like its software, the
inspiration for Cyberia had come from a very different location:
California.

‘Have you seen this nonsense?’ Andy Cameron thrust the latest issue of
*Wired* – San Francisco’s must-read magazine for new media enthusiasts –
into my hands and pointed to yet another article enthusing about the
venture capitalists of Silicon Valley. ‘I’m fed up with English people
who would never support privatising the National Health Service, but, as
soon as it comes to the Net, they embrace every neoliberal idiocy
advocated by this publication!’ It was 1995 and we’d just set up the
Hypermedia Research Centre at the University of Westminster. Andy was
already working with a group of talented undergraduates who would later
find fame as the interactive designers of the Anti-rom collective. A
year earlier, he’d recruited me to help him to set up the first
postgraduate degree in Europe focused on the Net: the MA in Hypermedia
Studies. On that spring evening, Andy now had another brilliant idea:
‘Why don’t we both write an article exposing the follies of *Wired*
magazine? If nothing else, it would be our manifesto for the Hypermedia
Research Centre which differentiates us from the West Coast
neoliberals!’ Over the next few weeks, with the aid of plenty of beer
and weed, we worked hard on creating the opening essay of this pamphlet.
Even now, after so many years, I can still recognise who wrote the first
draft of key passages in its text. By taking turns to revise the
article, we were eventually able to synthesise our ideas into the final
version of *The Californian Ideology*. Pleased with our collaborative
effort, we next arranged for this polemic to be posted on the nettime
mailing list and published by *Mute* magazine. Initially, we’d hoped
that our essay might encourage some critical thinking amongst the
pioneers of the Net in England. Much to our surprise, we soon realised
that we’d written the canonical text of 1990s dotcom scepticism. Within
a few years, *The Californian Ideology* had been translated into several
different languages and republished in many different formats. Louis
Rossetto – the editor of *Wired* – was forced to issue a defence of his
journal’s deficiencies. Ironically, given our denunciations of
biobabble, the title of our article became a meme: the quick way of
defining the nasty neoliberal politics of Silicon Valley entrepreneurs.
Most wonderfully, lots of people who’d never read *The Californian
Ideology* knew exactly what we meant by this phrase...

Twenty years on, with the colonisation of the Net by corporate behemoths
and the exposure of their collaboration with the USA’s spy agencies, the
central arguments in our text no longer appear as controversial as they
did when it first appeared. Yet, despite the changed historical
circumstances, the widespread belief in the inherently liberating power
of information technologies hasn’t disappeared. As the dotcom boosters
boasted, the 2011 Arab Spring and Occupy protests proved that commercial
platforms like Facebook and Twitter can be utilised for subversive
goals. For large numbers of people, the emancipated future is still
made-in-the-USA. Even though *The Californian Ideology* was published in
the last century, its analysis has never been more relevant. When we
wrote the article, our aim was to expose the most glaring
inconsistencies within the laissez-faire politics of *Wired* magazine
which are still being promulgated today in new disguises:

-   the identification of Silicon Valley’s 1990s hi-tech neoliberalism
    with San Francisco’s 1960s hippie counter-culture;

-   the assertion that the Net was solely created by heroic
    entrepreneurs rather than a combination of public, private and
    community initiatives;

-   the McLuhanist claim that media technologies not human actions are
    the subject of history;

-   the celebration of the Net as the realisation of ‘Jefferson
    democracy’ with no sense of irony about Thomas Jefferson being
    a slave-owner.

As an ex-member of a Trotskyist sect, Andy had been schooled in the
Bolshevik technique of ideology critique. According to V.I. Lenin, the
ruling class dominated the masses by imposing its self-interested view
of reality upon them through the media, education and religion. For the
Bolsheviks, the primary task of the revolutionary movement was
discrediting the ideas of their reactionary opponents. When our article
appeared, Andy was most amused at how many people read it in this way.
While the text was designed to make the admirers of *Wired* question its
neoliberal vision of the Net, we’d never any illusions about the power
of mere words. Crucially, the title of our piece was a remix of Karl
Marx and Friedrich Engels’ famous polemic against their erstwhile Young
Hegelian comrades: *The German Ideology*. In contrast with Lenin, they’d
argued that people’s consciousness of the world was shaped by the
material conditions of the historical moment. Ideology was a symptom not
the essence of class rule. We understood the implications of their
wisdom for our own work. Damning denunciations of *Wired* couldn’t
discredit this magazine’s most convincing argument in favour of hi-tech
neoliberalism: the Net was being built on the West Coast. In the
conclusion of our article, we urged the digital artisans of Europe to
open up a more inclusive and equalitarian path of development towards
the information society. Ideology critique was only the beginning of
this difficult process. Supplanting the Californian vision of the
digital future would require the innovation of a better political
economy.

The second article in this book – *Cyber-communism* – was published four
years after our diatribe against *Wired* magazine appeared. In the
intervening period, the Net had become the iconic technology of the
decade. Immune to all criticism, the Californian Ideology was now
triumphant. According to both media pundits and academic experts, the
Net was creating a ‘new paradigm’ of global entrepreneurial capitalism
which would soon sweep away the state regulations and bureaucratic
monoliths of the industrial epoch. Enthused by this neoliberal prophecy,
investors were pushing up the prices of the stocks of the new media
companies being launched on Wall Street to ever higher levels: the
dotcom bubble. No one wanted to miss getting a piece of the next
Microsoft or Apple before it became super-profitable. In 1998, as this
speculative frenzy was reaching its peak, I was contacted by Lance
Strate from Fordham University in New York who was organising the 50th
anniversary celebration of the first time that Marshall McLuhan had
taught at this esteemed institution. ‘We’ve got lots of academics giving
papers at our event,’ he told me, ‘but they’re all very respectable. I
was wondering whether you could stir things up by creating a suitably
wacky McLuhan-style ‘thought probe’ for the conference?’ Intrigued by
Lance’s request, I set to work on the lecture which was the starting
point for the second article in this book. Back in the 1960s, McLuhan’s
thought probes had provoked his audiences with wild assertions which
encouraged them think about contemporary reality in a different way. For
instance, in one of his most famous slogans, he emphasised that people
were more influenced by the psychological impact of communications
technologies than their ideological content: ‘the medium is the
message’. Much to his delight, McLuhan had succeeded in outraging both
the defenders of bourgeois morality and the devotees of Bolshevik
politics. My task for Lance was now to devise a similarly contrarian
proposition. Since the conventional wisdom in the late-1990s was that
the Net was the apotheosis of free market capitalism, I thought why not
argue the exact opposite? The faith of the Californian Ideologists in
the unilinear march of history towards hi-tech neoliberalism had long
reminded me of Stalinist hymns to the inevitable victory of ‘really
existing socialism’ during the Cold War. The widespread flouting of
copyright could easily be interpreted as the imminent demise of
commodity production within the emerging information economy. Delighted
that I’d found the perfect thought probe, I was ready for my
intervention at Fordham’s McLuhan conference. When my turn came, I went
up to the podium and began my talk by loudly proclaiming: ‘At the height
of the Cold War, the US military funded the creation of the only working
model of communism in human history: the Internet!’

On my return to London, I transformed my performance at Fordham into the
second article in this book which soon appeared in various mixes both in
print and online. For those who thought that the co-author of *The
Californian Ideology* must be an intransigent anti-American, my apparent
enthusiasm in *Cyber-communism* for the Promethean possibilities of that
nation’s dotcom companies was puzzling. Even worse, the original version
of the text concluded with an outrageous dedication to the USAF pilots
who’d provided air support for the UÇK partisans during the 1999 Kosova
War of Independence. Since the article was constructed as a
McLuhan-style thought probe, this provocative stance was entirely
deliberate. At the turn of the millennium, the American empire was still
the undisputed hegemon of the world system. The implosion of the USSR
had not only removed its only serious imperialist rival, but also
discredited the ideological appeal of all forms of socialism.
Notoriously, its ruling elite was now convinced that the USA’s brand of
neoliberal capitalism was the apogee of human civilisation: the Hegelian
‘end of history’. Channelling McLuhan, my goal in *Cyber-communism* was
to turn this smug triumphalism against itself. Back in the 1920s and
1930s, both Social Democrats and Council Communists had argued that the
Bolshevik regime was transforming the Russian economy into a
totalitarian version of an American automobile factory: state
capitalism. Reversing this identification, my article pointed out that
the dotcom capitalists of Silicon Valley were perpetuating Joseph
Stalin’s enthusiasm for technological elitism and production as an end
in itself. In this Hegelian dialectic, the ideological fervour of
superpower rivalry during the Cold War had always hidden a mutual
commitment to the economic rationality of managerial hierarchy. If the
USSR was state capitalist, then the USA must be a privatised form of
socialist planning.

By refuting the Cold War’s geopolitical orthodoxies, my aim was to
revive the previous century’s definition of communism for the next one.
Before the Bolsheviks’ 1917 seizure of power in Russia, Social Democrats
in Europe had interpreted this phrase as the promise of an emancipated
future beyond capitalism. As Marx emphasised, it would only possible to
create this new society once all of the possibilities of the old system
were exhausted. The Left’s day-to-day struggles for political democracy
and economic prosperity were helping to speed up the evolution of
capitalism towards its final demise. If understood in Marx’s meaning,
this meant that the most communist country on the planet in the
late-1990s must be the global hegemon: the USA. Through this paradoxical
insight, the shift within cultural production towards user-generated
content became the harbinger of a more profound social transformation.
When sharing information on the Net, American neoliberals were
spontaneously abandoning the capitalist way of doing things: buying and
selling in the marketplace. In their relentless search for profits,
Silicon Valley’s companies were building the infrastructure for the next
stage of human civilisation: the hi-tech gift economy.

Looking back from the second decade of the 21st century, my McLuhanist
satire of the dotcom bubble now seems both prescient and dated. Having
at long last tired of Post-Modernism’s atemporality, Left academics have
recently rediscovered Marx’s subversive interpretation of the grand
narrative of history. Echoing the arguments of *Cyber-communism*, they
also emphasise that humanity can only escape from capitalist
exploitation by fully realising all of its emancipatory potential:
‘accelerationism’. However, in contrast with my article, these
born-again Marxists are no longer sure that the cutting-edge of progress
is located in the USA. During the intervening period, this global
hegemon has faced increasing problems at home: political gridlock,
decaying infrastructure, endemic corruption, financial crises and
increasing inequality. Above all, the American empire has not only
fought and lost two brutal wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, but also
embarked on a megalomaniac scheme to spy on the personal communications
of everyone on the planet. Not surprisingly, the concluding flourish of
*Cyber-communism* which counterposed the modernising energy of the USA
with the regressive involution of Serbia now appears absurd. In 1999,
because the UÇK was founded by Maoists, the Kosovar exiles who I met in
London were very cynical about the Americans’ motivations for suddenly
switching to their side in the Balkans conflict. Despite this Left
scepticism, when the global imperialist helped them to defeat the
regional imperialist, they were still convinced that their newly
liberated nation had finally joined the modern world. Yet, in
retrospect, it is Slobodan Milošević’s Serbia in the 1990s that now
looks like a premonition of the nightmare politics of 2010s Western
capitalism: an ex-banker despot presiding over a regime which combined
the worst features of neoliberalism and fascism. As I write this
introduction, the civilian populations of Gaza, Mosul and Donetsk are
paying a heavy price for the hegemon’s flight from modernity. If these
horrors in the borderlands aren’t to spread across the entire imperial
system, a new strategy for accelerating into the better future is now
urgently required.

The two essays from the 1990s in this book are a small contribution to
formulating the escape from our contemporary predicament. Today, for
many of its former enthusiasts, the utopian promises of the information
society have been fatally betrayed by the corporatisation and
militarisation of the Net. However, although *The* *Californian
Ideology* anticipated their critical attitude to Silicon Valley hype,
Andy and I also emphasised that there was nothing inevitable about the
ascendency of hi-tech neoliberalism. In its conclusion, our article
pointed out that the Minitel system was built upon a different political
economy than its American rival. Contradicting *Wired* magazine’s horror
at the leading role of a state-owned telecommunications monopoly, the
French version of packet-switched networking was able to commodify all
of its online services by delivering them through premium phone lines.
Ironically, as my *Cyber-communism* piece celebrated, it is the
made-in-the-USA internet which has always had difficulties in applying
the dogmas of bourgeois economics within its virtual world.
User-generated content and open source software are the creations of
voluntary labour. Through these two insights, the newly fashionable pose
of technological pessimism can be dismissed with ease. The story of
Minitel proves that computer-mediated-communications isn’t inherently
neoliberal in its social implementation. The importance of the hi-tech
gift economy demonstrates that online collective labour can be organised
effectively without requiring money-commodity relations. Back in the
1950s, Aksel Berg, Oscar Lange and other reformers in the East dreamt of
replacing the top-down planning of the Stalinist bureaucracy with
bottom-up decision-making by producers and consumers over a computer
network: cybernetic communism. With our much superior hardware and
software, we now have the opportunity to transform their theoretical
speculations into lived reality. By reshaping the Net in our own
interests, both the authoritarian state and the oligarchic marketplace
can be superseded by a massive multi-player participatory democracy.
Let’s resume the acceleration into the emancipated future and dedicate
our energies to creating a truly human civilisation!

Richard Barbrook

London, England

31 July 2014




# The Californian Ideology
<p class="author">Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron</p>

*Not to lie about the future is impossible and one can lie about it at
will.*

Naum Gabo and Anton Pevsner, *The Realistic Manifesto* (1920)

## As the Dam Bursts...

At the end of the 20th century, the long predicted convergence of the
media, computing and telecommunications into hypermedia is finally
happening.[^1] Once again, capitalism’s relentless drive to diversify
and intensify the creative powers of human labour is on the verge of
qualitatively transforming the way in which we work, play and live
together. By integrating different technologies around common protocols,
something is being created which is more than the sum of its parts. When
the ability to produce and receive unlimited amounts of information in
any form is combined with the reach of the global telephone networks,
existing forms of work and leisure can be fundamentally transformed. New
industries will be born and current stock market favourites will swept
away. During such moments of profound social change, anyone who can
offer a simple explanation of what is happening will be listened to with
great interest. At this crucial juncture, a loose alliance of writers,
hackers, capitalists and artists from the West Coast of the USA have
succeeded in defining a heterogeneous orthodoxy for the coming
information age: the Californian Ideology.

This new faith has emerged from a bizarre fusion of the cultural
bohemianism of San Francisco with the hi-tech industries of Silicon
Valley. Promoted in magazines, books, TV programmes, websites,
newsgroups and Net conferences, the Californian Ideology promiscuously
combines the free-wheeling spirit of the hippies and the entrepreneurial
zeal of the yuppies. This amalgamation of opposites has been achieved
through a profound faith in the emancipatory potential of the new
information technologies. In the digital utopia, everybody will be both
hip and rich. Not surprisingly, this optimistic vision of the future has
been enthusiastically embraced by computer nerds, slacker students,
innovative capitalists, social activists, trendy academics, futurist
bureaucrats and opportunistic politicians across the USA. As usual,
Europeans have not been slow in copying the latest fad from America.
While a recent EU Commission report recommends following the Californian
‘free market’ model for building the ‘information superhighway’,
cutting-edge artists and academics eagerly imitate the ‘post-human’
philosophers of the West Coast’s Extropian cult.[^2] With no obvious
rivals, the triumph of the Californian Ideology appears to be complete.

The widespread appeal of these West Coast ideologues isn’t simply the
result of their infectious optimism. Above all, they are passionate
advocates of what appears to be an impeccably libertarian form of
politics – they want information technologies to be used to create a new
‘Jeffersonian democracy’ where all individuals will be able to express
themselves freely within cyberspace.[^3] However, by championing this
seemingly admirable ideal, these techno-boosters are at the same time
reproducing some of the most atavistic features of American society,
especially those derived from the bitter legacy of slavery. Their
utopian vision of California depends upon a wilful blindness towards the
other – much less positive – features of life on the West Coast: racism,
poverty and environmental degradation.[^4] Ironically, in the not too
distant past, the intellectuals and artists of the Bay Area were
passionately concerned about these issues.

## Ronald Reagan v. the Hippies

On 15th May 1969, Governor Ronald Reagan ordered armed police to carry
out a dawn raid against hippie protesters who had occupied People’s Park
near the Berkeley campus of the University of California. During the
subsequent battle, one man was shot dead and 128 other people needed
hospital treatment.[^5] On that day, the ‘straight’ world and the
counter-culture appeared to be implacably opposed. On one side of the
barricades, Governor Reagan and his followers advocated unfettered
private enterprise and supported the invasion of Vietnam. On the other
side, the hippies championed a social revolution at home and opposed
imperial expansion abroad. In the year of the raid on People’s Park, it
seemed that the historical choice between these two opposing visions of
America’s future could only be settled through violent conflict. As
Jerry Rubin, one of the Yippie leaders, said at the time: ‘Our search
for adventure and heroism takes us outside America, to a life of
self-creation and rebellion. In response, America is ready to destroy
us...’[^6]

During in the 1960s, radicals from the Bay Area pioneered the political
outlook and cultural style of New Left movements across the world.
Breaking with the narrow politics of the post-war era, they launched
campaigns against militarism, racism, sexual discrimination, homophobia,
mindless consumerism and pollution. In place of the traditional left’s
rigid hierarchies, they created collective and democratic structures
which supposedly prefigured the libertarian society of the future. Above
all, the Californian New Left combined political struggle with cultural
rebellion. Unlike their parents, the hippies refused to conform to the
rigid social conventions imposed on ‘organisation man’ by the military,
the universities, the corporations and even left-wing political parties.
Instead they openly declared their rejection of the straight world
through their casual dress, sexual promiscuity, loud music and
recreational drugs.[^7]

The radical hippies were liberals in the social sense of the word. They
championed universalist, rational and progressive ideals, such as
democracy, tolerance, self-fulfilment and social justice. Emboldened by
over twenty years of economic growth, they believed that history was on
their side. In sci-fi novels, they dreamt of ‘ecotopia’: a future
California where cars had disappeared, industrial production was
ecologically viable, sexual relationships were egalitarian and daily
life was lived in community groups.[^8] For some hippies, this vision
could only be realised by rejecting scientific progress as a false God
and returning to nature. Others, in contrast, believed that
technological progress would inevitably turn their libertarian
principles into social fact. Crucially, influenced by the theories of
Marshall McLuhan, these technophiliacs thought that the convergence of
media, computing and telecommunications would inevitably create the
*electronic agora* – a virtual place where everyone would be able to
express their opinions without fear of censorship.[^9] Despite being a
middle-aged English professor, McLuhan preached the radical message that
the power of big business and big government would be imminently
overthrown by the intrinsically empowering effects of new technology on
individuals.

> *Electronic media (...) abolish the spatial dimension (...) By
> electricity, we everywhere resume person-to-person relations as if on
> the smallest village scale. It is a relation in depth, and without
> delegation of functions or powers (...) Dialogue supersedes the
> lecture.*[^10]

Encouraged by McLuhan’s predictions, West Coast radicals became involved
in developing new information technologies for the alternative press,
community radio stations, home-brew computer clubs and video
collectives. These community media activists believed that they were in
the forefront of the fight to build a new America. The creation of the
electronic agora was the first step towards the implementation of direct
democracy within all social institutions.[^11] The struggle might be
hard, but ‘ecotopia’ was almost at hand.

## The Rise of the Virtual Class

Who would have predicted that, in less than 30 years after the battle
for People’s Park, squares and hippies would together create the
Californian Ideology? Who would have thought that such a contradictory
mix of technological determinism and libertarian individualism would
becoming the hybrid orthodoxy of the information age? And who would have
suspected that as technology and freedom were worshipped more and more,
it would become less and less possible to say anything sensible about
the society in which they were applied?

The Californian Ideology derives its popularity from the very ambiguity
of its precepts. Over the last few decades, the pioneering work of the
community media activists has been largely recuperated by the hi-tech
and media industries. Although companies in these sectors can mechanise
and sub-contract much of their labour needs, they remain dependent on
key people who can research and create original products, from software
programs and computer chips to books and TV programmes. Along with some
hi-tech entrepreneurs, these digital artisans form the so-called
‘virtual class’: ‘...the techno-intelligentsia of cognitive scientists,
engineers, computer scientists, video-game developers, and all the other
communications specialists...’[^12] Unable to subject them to the
discipline of the assembly-line or replace them by machines, managers
have organised such skilled workers through fixed-term contracts. Like
the ‘labour aristocracy’ of the 19th century, core personnel in the
media, computing and telecoms industries experience the rewards and
insecurities of the marketplace. On the one hand, these digital artisans
not only tend to be well-paid, but also have considerable autonomy over
their pace of work and place of employment. As a result, the cultural
divide between the hippie and the organisation man has now become rather
fuzzy. Yet, on the other hand, these skilled workers are tied by the
terms of their contracts and have no guarantee of continued employment.
Lacking the free time of the hippies, work itself has become the main
route to self-fulfilment for much of the virtual class.[^13]

The Californian Ideology offers a way of understanding the lived reality
of these digital artisans. On the one hand, these core workers are a
privileged part of the labour force. On the other hand, they are the
heirs of the radical ideas of the community media activists. The
Californian Ideology, therefore, simultaneously reflects the disciplines
of market economics and the freedoms of hippie artisanship. This bizarre
hybrid is only made possible through a nearly universal belief in
technological determinism. Ever since the 1960s, liberals – in the
social sense of the word – have hoped that the new information
technologies would realise their ideals. Responding to the challenge of
the New Left, the New Right has resurrected an older form of liberalism:
economic liberalism.[^14] In place of the collective freedom sought by
the hippie radicals, they have championed the liberty of individuals
within the marketplace. Yet even these conservatives couldn’t resist the
romance of the new information technologies. Back in the 1960s,
McLuhan’s predictions were reinterpreted as an advertisement for new
forms of media, computing and telecommunications being developed by the
private sector. From the 1970s onwards, Alvin Toffler, Ithiel de Sola
Pool and other gurus attempted to prove that the advent of the Net would
paradoxically involve a return to the economic liberalism of the
past.[^15] This retro-utopia echoed the predictions of Isaac Asimov,
Robert Heinlein and other macho sci-fi novelists whose future worlds
were always filled with space traders, superslick salesmen, genius
scientists, pirate captains and other rugged individualists.[^16] The
path of technological progress didn’t always lead to ecotopia – it could
instead lead back to the America of the Founding Fathers.

## Electronic Agora or Electronic Marketplace?

The ambiguity of the Californian Ideology is most pronounced in its
contradictory visions of the digital future. The development of
hypermedia is a key component of the next stage of capitalism. As
Shoshana Zuboff points out, the introduction of media, computing and
telecommunications technologies into the factory and the office is the
culmination of a long process of separation of the workforce from direct
involvement in production.[^17] If only for competitive reasons, all
major industrial economies will eventually be forced to wire up their
populations to obtain the productivity gains of digital working. What is
unknown is the social and cultural impact of allowing people to produce
and exchange almost unlimited quantities of information on a global
scale. Above all, will the advent of hypermedia will realise the utopias
of either the New Left or the New Right? As a hybrid faith, the
Californian Ideology happily answers this conundrum by believing in both
visions at the same time – and by not criticising either of them.

On the one hand, the anti-corporate purity of the New Left has been
preserved by the advocates of the virtual community. According to their
guru, Howard Rheingold, the values of the counter-culture baby boomers
are shaping the development of new information technologies. As a
consequence, community activists will be able to use new media to
replace corporate capitalism and big government with a hi-tech gift
economy. Already bulletin board systems, Net real-time conferences and
chat facilities rely on the voluntary exchange of information and
knowledge between their participants. In Rheingold’s view, the members
of the virtual class are still in the forefront of the struggle for
social liberation. Despite the frenzied commercial and political
involvement in building the information superhighway, the electronic
agora will inevitably triumph over its corporate and bureaucratic
enemies.[^18]

On the other hand, other West Coast ideologues have embraced the
laissez-faire ideology of their erstwhile conservative enemy. For
example, *Wired* – the monthly bible of the virtual class – has
uncritically reproduced the views of Newt Gingrich, the extreme-right
Republican leader of the House of Representatives, and the Tofflers, who
are his close advisors.[^19] Ignoring their policies for welfare
cutbacks, the magazine is instead mesmerised by their enthusiasm for the
libertarian possibilities offered by new information technologies.
However, although they borrow McLuhan’s technological determinism,
Gingrich and the Tofflers aren’t advocates of the electronic agora. On
the contrary, they claim that the convergence of the media, computing
and telecommunications will produce an *electronic marketplace*: ‘In
cyberspace (...) market after market is being transformed by
technological progress from a “natural monopoly” to one in which
competition is the rule.’[^20]

In this version of the Californian Ideology, each member of the virtual
class is promised the opportunity to become a successful hi-tech
entrepreneur. Information technologies, so the argument goes, empower
the individual, enhance personal freedom, and radically reduce the power
of the nation-state. Existing social, political and legal power
structures will wither away to be replaced by unfettered interactions
between autonomous individuals and their software. These restyled
McLuhanists vigorously argue that big government should stay off the
backs of resourceful entrepreneurs who are the only people cool and
courageous enough to take risks. In place of counter-productive
regulations, visionary engineers are inventing the tools needed to
create a free market within cyberspace, such as encryption, digital
money and verification procedures. Indeed, attempts to interfere with
the emergent properties of these technological and economic forces,
particularly by the government, merely rebound on those who are foolish
enough to defy the primary laws of nature. According to the executive
editor of *Wired*, the ‘invisible hand’ of the marketplace and the blind
forces of Darwinian evolution are actually one and the same thing.[^21]
As in Heinlein’s and Asimov’s sci-fi novels, the path forwards to the
future seems to lead back to the past. The 21st century information age
will be the realisation of the 18th century liberal ideals of Thomas
Jefferson: ‘ (...) the (...) creation of a new civilisation, founded in
the eternal truths of the American Idea.[^22]

## The Myth of the Free Market

Following the victory of Gingrich’s party in the 1994 legislative
elections, this right-wing version of the Californian Ideology is now in
the ascendant. Yet, the sacred tenets of economic liberalism are
contradicted by the actual history of hypermedia. For instance, the
iconic technologies of the computer and the Net could only have been
invented with the aid of massive state subsidies and the enthusiastic
involvement of amateurs. Private enterprise has played an important
role, but only as one part of a mixed economy.

For example, the first computer – the Difference Engine – was designed
and built by private companies, but its development was only made
possible through a British Government grant of £17,470, which was a
small fortune in 1834.[^23] From Colossus to EDVAC, from flight
simulators to virtual reality, the development of computing has depended
at key moments on public research handouts or fat contracts with public
agencies. The IBM corporation only built the first programmable digital
computer after it was requested to do so by the US Defence Department
during the Korean War. Ever since, the development of successive
generations of computers has been directly or indirectly subsidised by
the American military budget.[^24] As well as state aid, the evolution
of computing has also depended upon the involvement of DIY culture.[^25]
For instance, the personal computer was invented by amateur techies who
wanted to construct their own cheap machines. The existence of a gift
economy amongst hobbyists was a necessary precondition for the
subsequent success of products made by Apple and Microsoft. Even now,
shareware programs still play a vital role in advancing software design.

The history of the internet also contradicts the tenets of the
neoliberal ideologues. For the first twenty years of its existence, the
Net’s development was almost completely dependent on the much reviled
American federal government. Whether via the US military or through the
universities, large amounts of tax payers’ dollars went into building
its infrastructure and subsidising the cost of using its services. At
the same time, many of the key Net programs and applications were
invented either by hobbyists or by professionals working in their
spare-time. For instance, the MUD program which allows real-time Net
conferencing was invented by a group of students who wanted to play
fantasy games over a computer network.[^26]

One of the weirdest things about the rightwards drift of the Californian
Ideology is that the West Coast itself is a creation of the mixed
economy. Government dollars were used to build the irrigation systems,
highways, schools, universities and other infrastructural projects which
makes the good life possible in California. On top of these public
subsidies, the West Coast hi-tech industrial complex has been feasting
off the fattest pork barrel in history for decades. The US government
has poured billions of tax dollars into buying planes, missiles,
electronics and nuclear bombs from Californian companies. For those not
blinded by free market dogmas, it was obvious that the Americans have
always had state planning: only they call it the defence budget.[^27] At
the same time, key elements of the West Coast’s lifestyle come from its
long tradition of cultural bohemianism. Although they were later
commercialised, community media, New Age spiritualism, gay pride,
surfing, health food, recreational drugs, pop music and many other forms
of cultural heterodoxy all emerged from the decidedly non-commercial
scenes based around university campuses, artists’ communities and rural
communes. Without its DIY culture, California’s myths wouldn’t have the
global resonance which they have today.[^28]

All of this public funding and community involvement has had an
enormously beneficial – albeit unacknowledged and uncosted – effect on
the development of Silicon Valley and other hi-tech industries.
Capitalist entrepreneurs often have an inflated sense of their own
resourcefulness in developing new ideas and give little recognition to
the contributions made by either the state, their own labour force or
the wider community. All technological progress is cumulative – it
depends on the results of a collective historical process and must be
counted, at least in part, as a collective achievement. Hence, as in
every other industrialised country, American entrepreneurs have
inevitably relied on state intervention and DIY initiatives to nurture
and develop their industries. When Japanese companies threatened to take
over the American microchip market, the libertarian computer capitalists
of California had no ideological qualms about joining a state-sponsored
cartel organised to fight off the invaders from the East. Until the Net
programs allowing community participation within cyberspace could be
included, Bill Gates believed that Microsoft had no choice but to delay
the launch of the Windows 95 operating system.[^29] As in other sectors
of the modern economy, the question facing the emerging hypermedia
industry isn’t whether or not it will be organised as a mixed economy,
but what sort of mixed economy it will be.

## Freedom is Slavery

If its holy precepts are refuted by profane history, why have the myths
of the free market so influenced the proponents of the Californian
Ideology? Living within a contract culture, the digital artisans lead a
schizophrenic existence. On the one hand, they cannot challenge the
primacy of the marketplace over their lives. On the other hand, they
resent attempts by those in authority to encroach on their individual
autonomy. By mixing New Left and New Right, the Californian Ideology
provides a mystical resolution of the contradictory attitudes held by
members of the virtual class. Crucially, anti-statism provides the means
to reconcile radical and reactionary ideas about technological progress.
While the New Left resents the government for funding the
military-industrial complex, the New Right attacks the state for
interfering with the spontaneous dissemination of new technologies by
market competition. Despite the central role played by public
intervention in developing computing and the Net, the Californian
Ideologues preach an anti-statist gospel of cybernetic libertarianism: a
bizarre mish-mash of hippie anarchism and economic liberalism beefed up
with lots of technological determinism. Rather than comprehend really
existing capitalism, gurus from both New Left and New Right much prefer
to advocate rival versions of a digital Jeffersonian democracy. For
instance, Rheingold as a follower of the New Left believes that the
electronic agora will allow individuals to exercise the sort of media
freedom advocated by the Founding Fathers. Similarly, the New Right
claim that the removal of all regulatory curbs on the private enterprise
will create media freedom worthy of a Jeffersonian democracy.[^30]

The triumph of this retro-futurism is a result of the failure of renewal
in the USA during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Following the
confrontation at People’s Park, the struggle between the American
establishment and the counter-culture entered into a spiral of violent
confrontation. While the Vietnamese – at the cost of enormous human
suffering – were able to expel the American invaders from their country,
the hippies and their allies in the black civil rights movement were
eventually crushed by a combination of state repression and cultural
co-option.

The Californian Ideology perfectly encapsulates the consequences of this
defeat for members of the virtual class. Although they enjoy cultural
freedoms won by the hippies, most of them are no longer actively
involved in the struggle to build ecotopia. Instead of openly rebelling
against the system, these digital artisans now accept that individual
freedom can only be achieved by working within the constraints of
technological progress and the free market. In many cyberpunk novels,
this asocial libertarianism is personified by the central character of
the hacker, who is a lone individual fighting for survival within the
virtual world of information.[^31]

The drift towards the right by the Californian Ideologues is the helped
by their unquestioning acceptance of the liberal ideal of the
self-sufficient individual. In American folklore, the nation was built
out of a wilderness by free-booting individuals – the trappers, cowboys,
preachers, and settlers of the frontier. The American revolution itself
was fought to protect the freedoms and property of individuals against
oppressive laws and unjust taxes imposed by a foreign monarch. For both
the New Left and the New Right, the early years of the American republic
provide a potent model for their rival versions of individual freedom.
Yet there is a profound contradiction at the centre of this primordial
American dream: individuals in this period only prospered through the
suffering of others. Nowhere is this clearer than in the life of Thomas
Jefferson – the chief icon of the Californian Ideology.

Thomas Jefferson was the man who wrote the inspiring call for democracy
and liberty in the American Declaration of Independence and – at the
same time – owned nearly 200 human beings as slaves. As a politician, he
championed the right of American farmers and artisans to determine their
own destinies without being subject to the restrictions of feudal
Europe. Like other liberals of the period, he thought that political
liberties could be protected from authoritarian governments only by the
widespread ownership of individual private property. The rights of
citizens were derived from this fundamental natural right. In order to
encourage self-sufficiency, he proposed that every American should be
given at least 50 acres of land to guarantee their economic
independence. Yet, while idealising the small farmers and businessmen of
the frontier, Jefferson was actually a Virginian plantation-owner living
off the labour of his slaves. Although the South’s ‘peculiar
institution’ troubled his conscience, he still believed that the natural
rights of man included the right to own human beings as private
property. In Jeffersonian democracy, freedom for white folks was based
upon slavery for black people.[^32]

## Forward Into the Past

Despite the eventual emancipation of the slaves and the victories of the
civil rights movement, racial segregation still lies at the centre of
American politics – especially on the West Coast. In the 1994 election
for governor in California, Pete Wilson, the Republican candidate, won
through a vicious anti-immigrant campaign. Nationally, the triumph of
Gingrich’s Republican party in the legislative elections was based on
the mobilisation of ‘angry white males’ against the supposed threat from
black welfare scroungers, immigrants from Mexico and other uppity
minorities. These politicians have reaped the electoral benefits of the
increasing polarisation between the mainly white, affluent suburbanites
– most of whom vote – and the largely non-white, poorer inner city
dwellers – most of whom don’t vote.[^33] Although they retain some
hippie ideals, many Californian Ideologues have found it impossible to
take a clear stand against the divisive policies of the Republicans.
This is because the hi-tech and media industries are a key element of
the New Right electoral coalition. In part, both capitalists and
well-paid workers fear that the open acknowledgement of public funding
of their companies would justify tax rises to pay for desperately needed
spending on health care, environmental protection, housing, public
transport and education. More importantly, many members of the virtual
class want to be seduced by the libertarian rhetoric and technological
enthusiasm of the New Right. Working for hi-tech and media companies,
they would like to believe that the electronic marketplace can somehow
solve America’s pressing social and economic problems without any
sacrifices on their part. Caught in the contradictions of the
Californian Ideology, Gingrich is – as one *Wired* contributor put it –
both their ‘friend and foe’.[^34]

In the USA, a major redistribution of wealth is urgently needed for the
long-term economic well-being of the majority of the population.
However, this is against the short-term interests of rich white folks,
including many members of the virtual class. Rather than share with
their poor black or hispanic neighbours, the yuppies instead retreat
into their affluent suburbs, protected by armed guards and secure with
their private welfare services.[^35] The deprived only participate in
the information age by providing cheap non-unionised labour for the
unhealthy factories of the Silicon Valley chip manufacturers.[^36] Even
the construction of cyberspace could become an integral part of the
fragmentation of American society into antagonistic, racially-determined
classes. Already ‘red-lined’ by profit-hungry telephone companies, the
inhabitants of poor inner city areas are now threatened with exclusion
from the new online services through lack of money.[^37] In contrast,
members of the virtual class and other professionals can play at being
cyberpunks within hyper-reality without having to meet any of their
impoverished neighbours. Alongside the ever-widening social divisions,
another apartheid is being created between the ‘information-rich’ and
the ‘information-poor’. In this hi-tech Jeffersonian democracy, the
relationship between masters and slaves endures in a new form.

## Cyborg Masters and Robot Slaves

The fear of the rebellious underclass has now corrupted the most
fundamental tenet of the Californian Ideology: its belief in the
emancipatory potentiality of the new information technologies. While the
proponents of the electronic agora and the electronic marketplace
promise to liberate individuals from the hierarchies of the state and
private monopolies, the social polarisation of American society is
bringing forth a more oppressive vision of the digital future. The
technologies of freedom are turning into the machines of dominance.

At his estate at Monticello, Jefferson invented many clever gadgets for
his house, such as a ‘dumb waiter’ to deliver food from the kitchen into
the dining room. By mediating his contacts with his slaves through
technology, this revolutionary individualist spared himself from facing
the reality of his dependence upon the forced labour of his fellow human
beings.[^38] In the late-20th century, technology is once again being
used to reinforce the difference between the masters and the slaves.

According to some visionaries, the search for the perfection of mind,
body and spirit will inevitably lead to the emergence of the
‘post-human’: a bio-technological manifestation of the social privileges
of the virtual class. While the hippies saw self-development as part of
social liberation, the hi-tech artisans of contemporary California are
more likely to seek individual self-fulfilment through therapy,
spiritualism, exercise or other narcissistic pursuits. Their desire to
escape into the gated suburb of the hyper-real is only one aspect of
this deep self-obsession.[^39] Emboldened by supposed advances in
Artificial Intelligence and medical science, the Extropian cult
fantasises of abandoning the ‘wetware’ of the human state altogether to
become living machines.[^40] Just like Virek and the Tessier-Ashpools in
William Gibson’s *Sprawl* novels, they believe that social privilege
will eventually endow them with immortality.[^41] Instead of predicting
the emancipation of humanity, this form of technological determinism can
only envisage a deepening of social segregation.

Despite these fantasies, white people in California remain dependent on
their darker-skinned fellow humans to work in their factories, pick
their crops, look after their children and tend their gardens. Following
the recent riots in Los Angeles, they increasingly fear that this
underclass will someday demand its liberation. If human slaves are
ultimately unreliable, then mechanical ones will have to be invented.
The search for the holy grail of Artificial Intelligence reveals this
desire for the Golem – a strong and loyal slave whose skin is the colour
of the earth and whose innards are made of sand. As in Asimov’s *Robot*
novels, the techno-utopians imagine that it is possible to obtain
slave-like labour from inanimate machines.[^42] Yet, although technology
can store or amplify labour, it can never remove the necessity for
humans to invent, build and maintain these machines in the first place.
Slave labour cannot be obtained without somebody being enslaved.

Across the world, the Californian Ideology has been embraced as an
optimistic and emancipatory form of technological determinism. Yet, this
utopian fantasy of the West Coast depends upon its blindness towards –
and dependence on – the social and racial polarisation of the society
from which it was born. Despite its radical rhetoric, the Californian
Ideology is ultimately pessimistic about fundamental social change.
Unlike the hippies, its advocates are not struggling to build ecotopia
or even to help revive the New Deal. Instead, the social liberalism of
New Left and the economic liberalism of New Right have converged into an
ambiguous dream of a hi-tech Jeffersonian democracy. Interpreted
generously, this retro-futurism could be a vision of a cybernetic
frontier where digital artisans discover their individual
self-fulfilment in either the electronic agora or the electronic
marketplace. However, as the zeitgeist of the virtual class, the
Californian Ideology is at the same time an exclusive faith. If only
some people have access to the new information technologies,
Jeffersonian democracy can become a hi-tech version of the plantation
economy of the Old South. Reflecting its deep ambiguity, the Californian
Ideology’s technological determinism is not simply optimistic and
emancipatory. It is simultaneously a deeply pessimistic and repressive
vision of the future.

## There are Alternatives

Despite its deep contradictions, people across the world still believe
that the Californian Ideology expresses the only way forward to the
future. With the increasing globalisation of the world economy, many
members of the virtual class in Europe and Asia feel more affinity with
their Californian peers than other workers within their own country.
Yet, in reality, debate has never been more possible or more necessary.
The Californian Ideology was developed by a group of people living
within one specific country with a particular mix of socio-economic and
technological choices. Its eclectic and contradictory blend of
conservative economics and hippie radicalism reflects the history of the
West Coast – and not the inevitable future of the rest of the world. For
instance, the anti-statist assumptions of the Californian Ideologues are
rather parochial. In Singapore, the government is not only organising
the construction of a fibre-optic network, but also trying to control
the ideological suitability of the information distributed over it.
Given the much faster growth rates of the Asian ‘tigers’, the digital
future will not necessarily first arrive in California.[^43]

Despite the neoliberal recommendations of the Bangemann Report, most
European authorities are also determined to be closely involved within
the development of new information technologies. Minitel – the first
successful online network in the world – was the deliberate creation of
the French state. Responding to an official report on the potential
impact of hypermedia, the government decided to pour resources into
developing ‘cutting edge’ technologies. In 1981, France Telecom launched
the Minitel system which provided a mix of text-based information and
communications facilities. As a monopoly, this nationalised telephone
company was able to build up a critical mass of users for its pioneering
online system by giving away free terminals to anyone willing to forgo
paper telephone directories. Once the market had been created,
commercial and community providers were then able to find enough
customers or participants to thrive within the system. Ever since,
millions of French people from all social backgrounds have happily
booked tickets, chatted each other up and politically organised online
without realising they were breaking the libertarian precepts of the
Californian Ideology.[^44]

Far from demonising the state, the overwhelming majority of the French
population believe that more public intervention is needed for an
efficient and healthy society.[^45] In the recent presidential
elections, almost every candidate had to advocate – at least
rhetorically – greater state intervention to end social exclusion of the
unemployed and homeless. Unlike its American equivalent, the French
revolution went beyond economic liberalism to popular democracy.
Following the victory of the Jacobins over their liberal opponents in
1792, the democratic republic in France became the embodiment of the
‘General Will’. As such, the state was believed to defend the interests
of all citizens, rather than just to protect the rights of individual
property-owners. The discourse of French politics allows for collective
action by the state to mitigate – or even remove – problems encountered
by society. While the Californian Ideologues try to ignore the
taxpayers’ dollars subsidising the development of hypermedia, the French
government can openly intervene in this sector of the economy.[^46]

Although its technology is now increasingly dated, the history of
Minitel clearly refutes the anti-statist prejudices of the Californian
Ideologues – and of the Bangemann committee. The digital future will be
a hybrid of state intervention, capitalist entrepreneurship and DIY
culture. Crucially, if the state can foster the development of
hypermedia, conscious action could also be taken to prevent the
emergence of the social apartheid between the ‘information rich’ and the
‘information poor’. By not leaving everything up to the vagaries of
market forces, the EU and its member states could ensure that every
citizen has the opportunity to be connected to a broadband fibre-optic
network at the lowest possible price.

In the first instance, this would be a much needed job creation scheme
for semi-skilled labour in a period of mass unemployment. As Keynesian
employment measure, nothing beats paying people to dig holes in the road
and fill them in again.[^47] Even more importantly, the construction of
a fibre-optic network into homes and businesses could give everyone
access to new online services and create a large vibrant community of
shared expertise. The long-term gains to the economy and to society from
the building of the information superhighway would be immeasurable. It
would allow industry to work more efficiently and market new products.
It would ensure that education and information services were available
to all. No doubt this broadband system will create a mass market for
private companies to sell existing information commodities – films, TV
programmes, music and books – across the Net. At the same time, once
people can distribute as well as receive hypermedia, a flourishing of
community media and special interest groups will quickly emerge. For all
this to happen, collective intervention will be needed to ensure that
all citizens are included within the digital future.

## The Rebirth of the Modern

Even if it is not in circumstances of their own choosing, it is now
necessary for Europeans to assert their own vision of the future. There
are varying ways forward towards the information society – and some
paths are more desirable than others. In order to make an informed
choice, European digital artisans need to develop a more coherent
analysis of the impact of hypermedia than can be found within the
ambiguities of the Californian Ideology. The members of the European
virtual class must create their own distinctive self-identity.

This alternative understanding of the future starts from a rejection of
any form of social apartheid – both inside and outside cyberspace. Any
program for developing hypermedia must ensure that the whole population
can have access to the new online services. In place of New Left or New
Right anarchism, a European strategy for developing the new information
technologies must openly acknowledge the inevitability of some form of
mixed economy – the creative and antagonistic mix of state, corporate
and DIY initiatives. The indeterminacy of the digital future is a result
of the ubiquity of this mixed economy within the modern world. No one
knows exactly what the relative strengths of each component will be, but
collective action can ensure that no social group is deliberately
excluded from cyberspace.

A European strategy for the information age must also celebrate the
creative powers of the digital artisans. Because their labour cannot be
deskilled or mechanised, members of the virtual class exercise great
control over their own work. Rather than succumbing to the fatalism of
the Californian Ideology, we should embrace the Promethean possibilities
of new media. Within the limitations of the mixed economy, digital
artisans are able to invent something completely new – something which
has not been predicted in any sci-fi novel. These innovative forms of
knowledge and communications will sample the achievements of others,
including some aspects of the Californian Ideology. It is now impossible
for any serious movement for social emancipation not to incorporate
feminism, drug culture, lesbian & gay liberation, ethnic identity and
other issues pioneered by West Coast radicals. Similarly, any attempt to
develop hypermedia within Europe will need some of the entrepreneurial
zeal and can-do attitude championed by the Californian New Right. Yet,
at the same time, the development of hypermedia means innovation,
creativity and invention. There are no precedents for all aspects of the
digital future.

As pioneers of the new, the digital artisans need to reconnect
themselves with the theory and practice of productive art. They are not
just employees of others – or even would-be cybernetic entrepreneurs.
They are also artist-engineers – designers of the next stage of
modernity. Drawing on the experience of the Saint-Simonists and
Constructivists, the digital artisans can create a new machine aesthetic
for the information age.[^48] For instance, musicians have used
computers to develop purely digital forms of music, such as jungle and
techno.[^49] Interactive artists have explored the potentiality of
CD-ROM technologies, as shown by the work of Antirom. The Hypermedia
Research Centre has constructed an experimental virtual social space
called *J’s Joint*.[^50] In each instance, artist-engineers are trying
to push beyond the limitations of both the technologies and their own
creativity. Above all, these new forms of expression and communications
are connected with the wider culture. The developers of hypermedia must
reassert the possibility of rational and conscious control over the
shape of the digital future. Unlike the elitism of the Californian
Ideology, the European artist-engineers must construct a cyberspace
which is inclusive and universal. Now is the time for the rebirth of the
Modern.

> *Present circumstances favour making luxury national. Luxury will
> become useful and moral when it is enjoyed by the whole nation. The
> honour and advantage of employing directly, in political arrangements,
> the progress of exact sciences and the fine arts (...) have been
> reserved for our century.*[^51]

# Cyber-Communism: How the Americans Are Superseding Capitalism in Cyberspace

<p class="author">Richard Barbrook</p>

*...is the impact of the (...) information revolution on capitalism not
the ultimate exemplification of (...) Marx’s thesis that: “at a certain
stage of their development, the material productive forces come into
conflict with the existing relations of production (...)”? (...) does
the prospect of the (...) “global village” not signal the end of market
relations (...) at least in the sphere of digitalised information?*

- Slavoj Žižek, *The Spectre is Still Roaming Around*



## Ghosts in the Machine

A spectre is haunting the Net: the spectre of communism. Reflecting the
extravagance of the new media, this spectre takes two distinct forms:
the theoretical appropriation of Stalinist communism and the everyday
practice of cyber-communism. Whatever their professed political beliefs,
all users of the Net enthusiastically participate in this left-wing
revival. Whether in theory or practice, each of them desires the digital
transcendence of capitalism. Yet, at the same time, even the most
dedicated leftist can no longer truly believe in communism. After the
fall of the Berlin Wall and the implosion of the Soviet Union, this
ideology is completely discredited. The promises of social emancipation
turned into the horrors of totalitarianism. The dreams of industrial
modernity culminated in economic stagnation. Far from representing the
future, communism seems like a relic from the past.

Above all, the Soviet Union was incapable of leading the information
revolution. The political and economic structures of Stalinist communism
were far too inflexible and secretive for the emergence of the new
technological paradigm. How could the totalitarian party allow everyone
to produce media without its supervision? How could the central planning
agency permit producers to form collaborative networks without its
authorisation? A much more open and spontaneous society was needed to
develop the Net. Excited by the libertarian potential of further digital
convergence, the proponents of almost every radical ideology have
recently updated their positions. Yet, among the cyber-feminists,
communication guerrillas, techno-nomads and digital anarchists, there is
no new version of the once dominant current of Stalinist communism. Even
its former acolytes admit that the Soviet Union exemplified the worst
failures of Fordism: authoritarianism, conformity and environmental
degradation.[^52]

The ideologues of American neo-liberalism have seized this opportunity
to lay claim to the future. For almost thirty years, they have been
predicting that new technologies were about to create a utopian
civilisation: the information society. For instance, the Tofflers have
long been convinced that the convergence of computing,
telecommunications and the media would free individuals from the
clutches of both big business and big government.[^53] Similarly, Ithiel
de Sola Pool prophesied that interactive television would allow everyone
to make their own media and participate in political
decision-making.[^54] Despite their radical rhetoric, these conservative
pundits were primarily interested in proving that information
technologies would force the privatisation and deregulation of all
economic activity. Their post-Fordist future was the return to the
liberal past. When the Net became popular, this free market
fundamentalism was quickly adapted to fit the new situation. Most
famously, *Wired* argues that the ‘New Paradigm’ of unregulated
competition between cyber-entrepreneurs is extending individual freedom
and encouraging technological innovation in the USA.[^55] As the Net
spreads across the world, the material and spiritual values of American
neo-liberalism will eventually be imposed on the whole of humanity. As
Louis Rossetto – the founding editor of *Wired* – explains:

> This new world \[of the Net\] is characterised by a new global economy
> that is inherently anti-hierarchical and decentralist, and that
> disrespects national boundaries or the control of politicians and
> bureaucrats (...) and by a global, networked consciousness (...) that
> is turning (...) bankrupt electoral politics (...) into a dead
> end.[^56]

## The Cult of the Digerati

The narcissism of the Californian Ideology reflects the self-confidence
of a triumphant nation. With the Cold War won, the USA no longer has any
serious military or ideological competitors. Even its economic rivals in
the EU and East Asia have been surpassed. According to most
commentators, the renaissance of American hegemony is founded upon its
lead in new information technologies. No country can match the ‘smart
weapons’ of the US military. Few companies can compete against the
‘smart machines’ used by American corporations. Above all, the USA
dominates the cutting-edge of technological innovation: the Net.
Realising the American dream, a lucky few are making huge fortunes from
floating their hi-tech companies on Wall Street.[^57] Mesmerised by the
commercial potential of e-commerce, many others are speculating their
savings on new media share issues.

> *Internet stocks (...) may be the hottest things since the Dutch
> tulip-bulb craze in the 1600s.*[^58]

Despite all the wealth being generated by technological innovation, the
division between rich and poor continues to widen in the USA.[^59] In
contrast with the European and East Asian forms of capitalism, American
neo-liberalism can successfully combine economic progress with social
immobility. Ever since the 1789 French revolution, conservatives have
searched for this union of opposites: reactionary modernism.[^60]
Although necessary for the survival of capitalism, the social
implications of economic growth have always frightened the Right. Over
the long-run, continual industrialisation slowly erodes class
privileges. As their incomes rise, ordinary people can increasingly
determine the political concerns and cultural attitudes of society. As a
result, successive generations of conservatives have faced the dilemma
of reconciling economic expansion with social stasis. Despite deep
ideological differences, they have always proposed the same solution:
the formation of a hi-tech aristocracy.[^61]

The earliest versions of this reactionary fantasy emphasised the
hierarchical division of labour under Fordism. Although many skills were
destroyed by the industrial system, new specialisms were simultaneously
created. Within Fordism, engineers, bureaucrats, teachers and other
professionals formed an intermediate layer between management and the
shopfloor.[^62] Unlike most employees, this section of the working class
received high incomes and escaped subordination to the assembly-line.
Fearful of losing their limited privileges, some professionals became
enthusiastic supporters of reactionary modernism. Instead of fighting
for social equality, they dreamt of founding a new aristocracy: the
technocracy.

> *Reason, science, and technology are not inert processes by which men
> \[and women\] discover, communicate, and apply facts disinterestedly
> and without passion, but means by which, through systems, some men
> \[and women\] organise and control the lives of other men \[and
> women\] according to their conceptions as to what is preferable.*[^63]

During the boom years of Fordism, the new ruling class was supposedly
being formed by the managers and other professionals from large
corporations and government departments.[^64] However, when the economy
went into crisis in the early-1970s, right-wing intellectuals were
forced to look for supporters amongst other sections of the intermediate
layer. Inspired by Marshall McLuhan, they soon discovered the growing
number of people developing new information technologies.[^65] For
almost three decades, conservative gurus have been predicting that the
new ruling class would be composed of venture capitalists, innovative
scientists, hacker geniuses, media stars and neoliberal ideologues: the
*digerati*.[^66] Seeking to popularise their prophecies, they always
claim that every hi-tech professional has the opportunity to become a
member of this new aristocracy. Within the convergent industries,
skilled workers are essential for the development of original products,
such as software programs and website designs. In common with many of
their peers, most digital artisans suffer from the insecurity of
contract employment. However, they also are better paid and have greater
autonomy over their work. As in the past, this ambiguous social position
can encourage gullibility towards reactionary modernism. Chasing the
American dream, many hi-tech workers hope to make millions from founding
their own company. Instead of identifying with their fellow employees,
they aspire to join the digerati: the new technocracy of the Net.[^67]

Unlike in earlier forms of conservatism, this desire for domination over
others is no longer openly expressed in the Californian Ideology.
Instead, its gurus claim that the rule of the digerati will benefit
everyone. For they are the inventors of sophisticated machines and the
improvers of production methods. They are pioneering the hi-tech
services which will eventually be enjoyed by the whole population. Over
time, the digerati will transform the restrictions of Fordism into the
freedoms of the information society. The compromises of representative
democracy will be replaced by personal participation within the
‘electronic town hall’. The limits on personal creativity in the
existing media will be overcome by interactive forms of aesthetic
expression. Even the physical confines of the body will be transcended
within cyberspace. In the Californian Ideology, the autocracy of the few
in the short-term is necessary for the liberation of the many in the
long-term.[^68]

*Not haves and have-nots – \[but have-nows and\] have-laters.*[^69]

## The Liberating Minority

What is now expected from the digerati in the age of the Net was once
predicted about other heroic elites in the times of steel and
electricity. Ever since the late-19th century, science fiction novelists
have fantasised about a small group of scientists and philosophers
inventing the technological fix for the problems of society.[^70] Among
political activists, this faith in the leading role of the enlightened
minority has an even older pedigree. At the peak of the French
revolution in the 1790s, the Jacobins decided that the democratic
republic could only be created by a revolutionary dictatorship. Although
their regime was fighting for political and cultural freedom,
substantial sections of the population violently resisted the
modernisation of French society. According to the Jacobins, the minds of
these traditionalists had been corrupted by the aristocracy and the
clergy. The revolutionary dictatorship was needed not only to crush
armed rebellions, but also to popularise the principles of republican
democracy. For only once everyone had been educated could all citizens
participate in political decision-making. The tyranny of the minority in
the short-term would lead to democracy for the majority in the
long-term.[^71]

Although the Jacobins only held power for a few years, their example has
inspired revolutionary movements for generations. In many countries,
radical groups have faced the identical problem of transforming
traditional communities into industrial societies. Whatever their
ideological differences, every revolutionary minority had the same
mission: leading the masses towards modernity. By the mid-19th century,
the European Left had realised that this goal of political and cultural
emancipation could only be achieved through economic progress. Henri de
Saint-Simon had explained that the power of the aristocracy and clergy
was founded upon agriculture. If the economy could be modernised, wealth
and power would inevitably transfer to members of the new industrial
professions: entrepreneurs, workers, politicians, artists and
scientists. Like the Jacobins, Saint-Simon argued that this new elite
shouldn’t just look after its own interests. For these modernisers also
had the historical task of liberating their less-fortunate fellow
citizens from poverty and ignorance. By creating economic abundance, the
enlightened minority would enable everyone to enjoy happy and productive
lives.

> *Politics should now be nothing more than the science of providing
> people with as many material goods and as much moral satisfaction as
> possible.*[^72]

Inspired by Saint-Simon, early socialists believed that economic growth
would inevitably lead to political and cultural emancipation. Under
capitalism, there had to be continual improvements in the methods and
machinery used to make goods and services: *the forces of production*.
Over time, these advances were slowly undermining the private ownership
of business: *the relations of production*. According to this version of
Saint-Simon, the increasing interdependence of the modern economy would
eventually force the adoption of more collective forms of social
organisation. Whatever their current difficulties, the parliamentary
parties of the European Left were confident of eventual victory. Sooner
or later, the development of the forces of production would democratise
the relations of production.[^73]

By the mid-20th century, this Marxist remix of Saint-Simon had also been
appropriated by apologists of totalitarianism. Even before seizing
power, V.I. Lenin had argued that revolutionary intellectuals should
form a prototype of the Jacobin dictatorship: the vanguard party.[^74]
Under the old order, the minds of most people were filled with incorrect
ideologies from right-wing newspapers, churches and other cultural
institutions. The enlightened minority had the historical duty of
leading these ignorant masses towards the utopian future. After the 1917
Russian revolution, Lenin and his followers were able to create a
modernising dictatorship. Like its predecessor in 1790s France, this new
regime was committed to fighting against reactionary forces and to
educating the whole population.[^75] In addition, the revolutionary
dictatorship had acquired an even more important task: the
industrialisation of the Russian economy. Appropriating the analysis of
Saint-Simon and his Marxist interpreters, Lenin claimed that economic
modernisation would eventually lead to political and cultural
liberation. By imposing authoritarian rule in the short-term, the
Russian revolutionaries hoped to construct participatory democracy in
the long-run.[^76]

This determination to modernise the economy soon led to the removal of
all political and cultural freedoms. The promise of eventual
emancipation justified the murder and imprisonment of millions. The
creativity of artists was reduced to making propaganda for the
totalitarian party. The modernising dictatorship had even lost interest
in improving the living conditions of the masses.[^77] Instead, the
Soviet leadership became obsessed with the introduction of new
technologies: the mechanical proof of increasing productive forces. By
the early-1930s, Josef Stalin – the tyrannical successor of Lenin – was
measuring progress towards the utopian future by rises in the output of
industrial goods: steel, cars, tractors and machine-tools.[^78] Economic
development had become an end in itself.

> *The results of the Five-Year Plan \[of industrialisation\] have shown
> that the capitalist system (...) has become obsolete and must give way
> to another, higher, Soviet, socialist system (...)*[^79]

Back in the 19th century, there had been no clear definition of
communism. While Mikhail Bakunin had found its antecedents within
peasant communities, Karl Marx believed that the new system was
prefigured by industrial co-operatives. [^80] But, after the Soviet
Union’s victory over Nazi Germany in 1945, there could no longer be any
doubt about the correct interpretation of communism. Across the world,
almost every revolutionary movement embraced some variant of the
Stalinist creed. The radical intellectuals must form a vanguard party to
overthrow the existing order. Once in power, this revolutionary minority
had to set up the modernising dictatorship. As well as providing
security and education, the totalitarian state would organise the rapid
development of the economy.[^81] Almost all radicals believed that this
Stalinist version of communism had been proved both in the factory and
on the battlefield. Once the Cold War started, any other interpretations
were marginalised. For nearly fifty years, the imperial rivalry between
the two superpowers was expressed as a fierce ideological conflict:
Russian communism versus American capitalism.

## Stalin in Silicon Valley

During the Cold War, each side claimed that its particular
socio-economic structures represented the future of all humanity.
Despite championing rival systems, the apologists of both superpowers
still shared a common – and unacknowledged – theoretical source:
Saint-Simon. Ever since the 1917 revolution, the Russian state had been
using his futurist prophecies to justify its actions. Learning from its
Cold War opponent, the US government began making similar claims about
its policies. Although promoting liberal capitalism, American
propagandists enthusiastically mimicked the theoretical rhetoric of
Stalinist communism. The power of the minority of capitalists was in the
long-term interests of the majority of the population. Any flaws in
American society would be soon solved by further economic growth. Above
all, the utopian potential of the USA was proved by continual
introduction of new technologies: the symbol of increasing productive
forces.[^82] Alongside their military-political contest over ‘spheres of
influence’, the two superpowers also competed over who represented the
future.

The collapse of the Soviet Union didn’t end the theoretical influence of
Stalinist communism over right-wing American intellectuals. On the
contrary, the global mission of the USA had been confirmed by victory
over its totalitarian rival. According to one apologist, American
neoliberalism is now the realisation of the Hegelian ‘end of history’.
Although wars and conflicts will continue, there is no longer any
alternative form of socio-economic system.[^83] For the proponents of
the Californian Ideology, this narcissistic assumption is proved by
American dominance over the cutting-edge of economic modernity: the Net.
If other countries also want to enter the information age, they will
have to imitate the peculiar social system of the USA. Like its Cold War
predecessors, this contemporary celebration of American neoliberalism
appropriates many theoretical assumptions from Stalinist communism. Once
again, the enlightened minority is leading the ignorant masses towards a
utopian civilisation. Any suffering caused by the introduction of
information technologies is justified by the promise of future
liberation.[^84] Echoing the Russian tyrant, the digerati even measure
progress towards utopia by increasing ownership of modern artefacts:
home computers, mobile phones and laptops.[^85] Although the Soviet
Union has long disappeared, the proponents of the Californian Ideology
are still appropriating the theoretical legacy of Stalinist communism:

  --------------------------- ----------------------------
  vanguard party              digerati
  The Five-Year Plan          The New Paradigm
  boy-meets-tractor           nerd-meets-Net
  Third International         Third Wave
  Moscow                      Silicon Valley
  *Pravda*                    *Wired*
  party line                  unique thought
  Soviet democracy            electronic town halls
  Lysenkoism                  memetics
  society-as-factory          society-as-Gaia-mind
  New Soviet Man              post-humans
  Stakhanovite norm-busting   overworked contract labour
  purges                      downsizing
  Russian nationalism         Californian chauvinism
  --------------------------- ----------------------------


## The Revenge of Saint-Simon

Across the industrialised world, this conservative appropriation of
Stalinism now dominates discussions about the Net. Every guru celebrates
the emergence of the new technocracy: the digerati. Every pundit claims
that these pioneers of the Net are building a new utopia: the
information society. Yet, like their Soviet predecessors, contemporary
right-wing intellectuals can only produce corrupted versions of
Saint-Simon’s prophecy. While this socialist philosopher wanted economic
progress to liberate everyone, these proponents of reactionary modernism
exclude the majority of the population from their hi-tech future. For
the privileges of the digerati depend upon the subordination of the
unenlightened masses. In the Californian Ideology, permanent
technological revolution is always identified with unchanging social
hierarchy. However, without the promise of eventual redemption, economic
modernisation becomes an end in itself. Once again, conservative
philosophers are promising an imaginary future to dissuade people from
improving their lived present.

Although always imminent, the arrival of the information society must be
perpetually postponed. As in the former Soviet Union, the prophecy of
Saint-Simon is never supposed to be actually realised within the USA. On
the contrary, the development of the forces of production is designed to
reinforce the existing relations of production. For both public and
private institutions only introduce new information technologies to
advance their own interests. Back in the 1960s, the US military funded
the invention of the Net to fight nuclear wars. Ever since the 1970s,
financial markets have used computer networks to impose their hegemony
over the entire world. During the last few years, both capitalist
companies and government departments have adopted the Net to improve
communications with their employees, contractors and clients. At the
moment, every speculator on Wall Street is looking for the
cyber-entrepreneur who is building the next Microsoft. Despite all the
utopian predictions of the digerati, there appears to be nothing
inherently emancipatory in the convergence of computing,
telecommunications and the media. Like earlier forms of capitalism, the
information society remains dominated by the hierarchies of the market
and the state.[^86]

At the beginning of the new millennium, American neoliberalism seems to
have successfully achieved the contradictory aims of reactionary
modernism: economic progress and social immobility. Because the
long-term goal of liberating everyone will never be reached, the
short-term rule of the digerati can last forever. Yet, as in the former
Soviet Union, this dialectic of development and stasis is inherently
unstable. By modernising agricultural societies, the ruling parties of
Stalinist communism slowly destroyed the foundations of their own power.
Over time, the relations of production formed by totalitarianism became
incompatible with the continual expansion of the forces of production.
At this historical moment, Saint-Simon finally had his revenge on his
false disciples.

> *The \[Stalinist\] communist revolution (...) has brought about a
> measure of industrial civilisation to vast areas of Europe and Asia.
> In this way, material bases have actually been created for a future
> freer society. Thus, while bringing about the most complete despotism,
> the \[Stalinist\] communist revolution has also created the basis for
> the abolition of despotism.*[^87]

Like its erstwhile opponent, American neo-liberalism is now also being
undermined by the development of the forces of production. As predicted
by Saint-Simon, the full potential of recent technological and social
advances cannot be realised within the traditional hierarchies of
capitalism. According to the proponents of the Californian Ideology, the
Net is founded upon the buying and selling of information goods and
services. Only through market competition can individual desires be
satisfied. Yet, when they go online, Net users are primarily engaged in
giving and receiving information as gifts. Quite spontaneously, people
are adopting more democratic methods of working together within
cyberspace.

Fulfilling the prophecy of Saint-Simon, these new relations of
production have emerged at the cutting-edge of economic progress: the
Net. Not surprisingly, they are being pioneered by a privileged minority
of the world’s population: people with access to computer-mediated
communications technologies. As a result, these new ways of working are
most widespread within the leading capitalist nation: the USA. The
technological and social preconditions for the realisation of
Saint-Simon’s prophecy are now present. While conservative ideologues
remain entranced by the theoretical legacy of Stalinist communism, their
fellow Americans are discovering the practical benefits of a new version
of this concept: cyber-communism.

> *Gift cultures are adaptations not to scarcity but to abundance. They
> arise in populations that do not have significant material-scarcity
> problems with survival goods.*[^88]

The gift economy of the Net emerges from the technological and social
advances catalysed by capitalist modernisation. Over the last three
hundred years, the reproduction, distribution and manipulation of
information has become slowly easier through a long process of
mechanisation. A manually operated press produced copies which were
relatively expensive, limited in numbers and impossible to alter without
recopying. After generations of technological improvements, the same
quantity of text on the Net is easily circulated, copied and remixed.
However, individuals need money and time to access this advanced
communications system. While most of the world’s population still live
in poverty, the inhabitants of the industrialised countries have reduced
their hours of employment and increased their wealth over two centuries
of economic growth. Ever since the advent of Fordism, mass production
has depended upon workers having enough resources and leisure for mass
consumption.[^89] Having disposable income and spare time, many workers
within the metropolitan countries are now able to work on their own
projects.[^90] Only at this particular historical moment have the
technical and social conditions developed sufficiently for the emergence
of cyber-communism.

*Capital thus works towards its own dissolution as the form dominating
production.*[^91]

## The Academic Gift Economy

The invention of the Net was the greatest irony of the Cold War. At the
height of the struggle against Stalinist communism, the US military
unwittingly bankrolled the creation of cyber-communism. Faced with the
threat of nuclear attack on command and control structures, research
money was given to scientists for experiments in computer-mediated
communications. Although initially developed for the military, its
inventors soon started using the Net for their own purposes. Crucially,
scientists simply assumed that all information should be distributed for
free over their new communications system. Unlike most other sectors of
production, the gift economy has long been the primary method of
socialising labour within universities. Funded by the state or by
donations, scientists don’t have to turn their intellectual work
directly into marketable commodities. Instead, research results are
publicised by ‘giving a paper’ at specialist conferences and by
‘contributing an article’ to academic journals. By being quoted,
scientists acquire personal recognition which enhances their career
prospects within the university system. Despite increasing
commercialisation, the giving away of findings remains the most
efficient method of solving common problems within a particular
scientific discipline.

> *The rationality of professional services is not the same as the
> rationality of the market (...) In the professions, and especially in
> science, the abdication of moral control would disrupt the system. The
> producer of professional services must be (...) responsible for his
> products, and it is fitting that he not be alienated from them.*[^92]

Because of these pioneers, the gift economy became firmly embedded
within the social mores of the Net. Over time, the charmed circle of its
users has slowly grown from scientists through hobbyists to the general
public. Each new member doesn’t just have to observe the technical rules
of the system, but also adheres to certain social conventions. Without
even thinking about it, people continually circulate information between
each other for free. Although the Net has expanded far beyond the
university, its users still prefer to co-operate together without the
direct mediation of money.

There are even selfish reasons for adopting cyber-communism. By adding
their own presence, every user is contributing something to the
collective knowledge accessible to those already online. In return for
this gift, each individual obtains potential access to all the
information provided on the Net by others. Within a market economy,
buyers and sellers tend to exchange commodities of equivalent worth.
Yet, within the hi-tech gift economy, everyone receives far more from
their fellow users than any individual could ever give away.[^93] Not
surprisingly, there is no popular clamour for imposing the equal
exchange of the marketplace on the Net. Even the most dogmatic
neoliberals are happily participating within cyber-communism.

From the beginning, these gift relations of production were hardwired
into the technological structure of the Net. Although funded by the
military, scientists developed computer-mediated communications to
facilitate the distribution and manipulation of their own research data.
Working at universities, they never conceived of this information as a
commodity. On the contrary, these academics were advancing their careers
by giving away the results of their labour. Creating a communications
system for their own use, they incorporated these working methods inside
the technologies of the Net.[^94] Above all, their invention depends
upon the continual and unhindered reproduction of information. When
online, every connection involves copying material from one computer to
another. Once the first copy of a piece of information is placed on the
Net, the cost of making each extra copy becomes almost zero. The
architecture of the system presupposes that multiple copies of documents
can easily be cached around the network. Although most of its users are
now from outside the academy, the technical design of the Net still
assumes that all information is a gift.

> *In an information space, we can consider the authorship of materials,
> and their perception; but (...) there is a need for the underlying
> infrastructure to be able to make copies simply for reasons of
> efficiency and reliability. The concept of “copyright” as expressed in
> terms of copies made makes little sense.*[^95]

## The Eclipse of Copyright

Despite its huge popularity, the gift economy of the Net appears to be
an aberration. Mesmerised by the Californian Ideology, almost all
politicians, executives and pundits are convinced that computer-mediated
communications can only be developed through market competition between
private enterprises. Like other products, information must be bought and
sold as a commodity. This faith in market forces comes from historical
experience. During the past three centuries, the mediation of commodity
exchange has dramatically increased the productivity of labour.
Responding to changes in prices, workers and resources are distributed
towards the most efficient sectors of the economy. Competing against
rival firms, entrepreneurs must continually improve the methods and
means of production. When disciplined by the market, the self-interest
of individuals can be directed towards increasing the wealth of the
whole nation.[^96]

The founding fathers of liberal economics discovered the central paradox
of capitalism: individual property is the precondition of collective
labour. In pre-modern societies, the aristocracy and clergy’s control
over their lands was circumscribed by feudal rights and duties. The work
of the peasantry was organised through the particular set of customs
found in each domain. In contrast, the pioneers of capitalism
transformed land into a tradable commodity: the enclosures. Once feudal
bonds were removed, work of different types and in various locations
could be regulated by a single mechanism: the marketplace.[^97] Over the
last few centuries, this modern form of collective labour has become
ubiquitous. For the disciplines of market competition not only raised
productivity within traditional trades, but also encouraged the
development of new industries. Within the metropolitan countries,
ordinary people are now using goods and services which were unavailable
even to kings and popes in earlier times. However, each of these
technological wonders has been shaped by the peculiar production
relations of capitalism. As well as satisfying a human desire, every new
product must also be sold as a commodity. Within a market economy, the
enclosure of collective labour is perpetual.[^98]

Under capitalism, most goods and services are produced as commodities.
If they’re tangible objects or temporary actions, this social
transformation is usually unproblematic. However, the commodification of
intellectual labour has always been more difficult. While teaching and
entertaining are like other services, publications are very different
from other goods. Most of work to create an information product is
expended in making the first copy. Even with the earliest printing
presses, the cost of producing each subsequent copy is always much
cheaper. In an open market, publishers would be encouraged to plagiarise
existing works rather than paying for new material. The first capitalist
nations quickly discovered a pragmatic solution to this economic
problem: copyright. Although everyone could buy cultural artefacts, the
right to reproduce them was limited by law. Like every other form of
work, intellectual labour could now be enclosed into a commodity.[^99]

> *Milton produced Paradise Lost as a silkworm produces silk, as the
> activation of his own nature. He later sold his product for £5 and
> thus became a merchant.*[^100]

At the end of the 20th century, copyright continues to provide the legal
framework for information production. Many forms of intellectual labour
are sold as commodities: books, music, films, games and software. The
publishers of copyright-protected artefacts have become major
industries: the multi-media multinationals. The international legal
agreements protecting intellectual property are continually tightened:
Berne, the WTO, TRIPS. Not surprisingly, most politicians, executives
and pundits assume that the Net will inevitably be commercialised. Like
radio broadcasting and cable television in earlier times, the moment of
the gift economy can only be temporary. As in other cultural industries,
intellectual labour within cyberspace has to be enclosed into
information commodities.[^101]

Anticipating this obsession, some pioneers did try to incorporate
copyright protection within computer-mediated communications. For
instance, Ted Nelson’s Xanadu project contained a sophisticated tracking
and payment system for enforcing intellectual property. Using this
software, individuals could work together by trading information
commodities with each other. Yet, despite its technical brilliance, the
Xanadu scheme failed for entirely social reasons.[^102] Instead of
encouraging participation, copyright protection proved to be a major
obstacle to online collaboration. For most people benefit more from
circulating information without payment than trading cultural
commodities. By giving away their own personal efforts, Net users always
receive the results of much greater amounts of labour in return from
others. The scarcity of copyright cannot compete against the abundance
of gifts. Far from intensifying commodification, the Net is the
practical vindication of the old hacker slogan: ‘information wants to be
free’.[^103]

At the cutting-edge of modernity, the exchange of commodities now plays
a secondary role to the circulation of gifts. The enclosure of
intellectual labour is challenged by a more efficient method of working:
disclosure. Within universities, scientists have long solved problems
within their specialisms by pooling their findings. As the Net grows,
more and more people are discovering the benefits of the gift economy.
For they are not only have the opportunity to contribute their own
information, but also gain access to the knowledge of many others.
Everyday, the users of the Net are sending emails, taking part in
listservers, making websites, contributing to newsgroups and
participating within online conferences. No longer enclosed in the
commodity, intellectual labour is continually disclosed as a gift. The
passive consumption of fixed information products is transforming into a
fluid process of ‘interactive creativity’.[^104]

> *The logic of digital technology leads us in a new direction. Objects,
> as well as ideas, are no longer fixed, no longer tangible. In
> cyberspace, there is no weight, no dimensions; structure is dynamic
> and changing; size is both infinite and immaterial. In this space,
> stories are written that change with each new reader; new material can
> be added, and old material can be deleted. Nothing is
> permanent.*[^105]

The types of interactive creativity between Net users are very varied.
While some online encounters are only temporary, others evolve into
long-lasting collaborations. Although many users only talk to close
friends and family, some are building relationships which solely exist
on the Net. If most online conversations are frivolous, other groups are
meeting to talk about serious issues. Out of all these different types
of interactive creativity, Net users have developed their own
distinctive form of social organisation: the network community.[^106] By
circulating gifts between each other, individuals are able to work
together on common projects. For, as well as having fun, the members of
network communities are engaged in a continuous process of collective
labour. Everyone can send out gifts of texts, visuals, animations,
music, games and other software to their online colleagues. In return,
they will receive lots of virtual presents from their fellow community
members. By contributing their own work, each individual potentially
possesses the creative efforts of the whole network community.[^107]

The pleasure of giving and receiving gifts can radically change the
personal experience of collective labour. Within the marketplace,
individuals primarily collaborate through the impersonal exchange of
commodities. The buyers and sellers should remain unconcerned about each
other’s fate. In contrast, the circulation of gifts encourages
friendships between its participants. The construction of a successful
network community is always a labour of love. Working within
cyber-communism can be not only more productive, but also more enjoyable
than digital capitalism. According to Howard Rheingold, these social
benefits of the hi-tech gift economy are not confined to the Net.
Despite all their wealth, many Americans are suffering from the
isolation and alienation imposed by market competition. Luckily, some
can now find friendship and intimacy within network communities. Since
there is no necessity for the enclosure of collective labour within
cyberspace, Americans can compensate for the damage caused by their
nation’s ‘...loss of a sense of a social commons.’[^108]

The results of interactive creativity within network communities are
often trivial and mundane. Yet, at the same time, some online
collaborations are creating very sophisticated products. Among the most
celebrated are the network communities working on free software. From
the beginning, scientists developed the core programs of the Net as
gifts. The exponential expansion of the system was only made possible by
the absence of proprietary barriers. For instance, although the Xanadu
project contained most of the technical capabilities of the Web, this
prototype of computer-mediated communications lacked the ‘killer app’ of
Tim Berners-Lee’s invention: the absence of copyright. Neither the
program nor its products were designed to be commodities.[^109]

In recent years, the rapid growth of the Net has catalysed an exuberant
revival of the hacker ethic. Increasingly frustrated with commercial
products, techies have come together to write their own software. When
enclosed by copyright, a program’s capabilities are frozen until the
next version is made available. Even its bugs cannot be fixed. In
contrast, when disclosed as a gift, this virtual machine can be
continually modified, amended and improved by anyone with the
appropriate programming skills. The product has become a process. Above
all, each member of the network community developing a program
potentially has access to the skills of all their colleagues. If one
person can’t solve a software problem, others within the group will help
find the solution.[^110] By participating within such interactive
creativity, formerly isolated techies are now making friends across the
world. Like other network communities, collective labour within free
software development can be not only more efficient, but also more
enjoyable than working on commercial projects. As technological
convergence intensifies, this gift economy of the Net is now encroaching
further into the market economy of computing.[^111] Starting from a
prototype by Linus Torvalds, a network community of developers is
building their own non-proprietary operating system: Linux.[^112] For
the first time, Microsoft has a serious competitor for Windows. Enclosed
by a capitalist monopoly, many American techies are working hard to
perfect its pragmatic alternative: software cyber-communism.

> *...you assume that bugs are generally shallow phenomena – or, at
> least, that they turn pretty shallow when exposed to a thousand eager
> co-developers pounding on every single new release.*[^113]

The convergence of many different technologies around digital formats is
also reinforcing the gift economies found in other areas of cultural
production. According to the multi-media multinationals, the Net will
soon have to adopt the methods of the marketplace. Protected by
encryption and passwords, digital information will be traded as a
commodity. However, these aspiring enclosers of the Net are already
confronted by the partial decommodisation of their own cultural
industries. For instance, the home-taping of music has existed for many
decades. The continual advances in digital reproduction and the rapid
spread of the Net are making this piracy of copyright material ever
easier.[^114] Crucially, the most innovative forms of popular music now
emerge from the creative appropriation of other people’s intellectual
property: house, hip-hop, drum & bass. Instead of remaining frozen in a
single recording, tunes and breaks can be repeatedly sampled, mixed and
remixed. If someone has a good idea, many other musicians will try to
refine the concept. Like the Net, contemporary DJ culture is also
interactive creativity.[^115]

For years, the most popular word entered into search engines was quite
predictable: ‘sex’. Yet, in 1999, the top request became the music
format of the Net: ‘MP3’.[^116] For the commercial music industry, the
minor problem of home-taping is amplifying into a major crisis. Since
copying and distributing is now so easy, many people are giving away
digital recordings not only to their friends, but also to complete
strangers. As music is integrated within the Net, the scarcity of
commodities is spontaneously transforming into the abundance of
gifts.[^117] As well as facilitating the piracy of existing recordings,
technological convergence also deepens musical interactive creativity.
Like many other people, musicians are working together, making friends
and inspiring each other within network communities. By publishing their
own material, they can offer their music as gifts to Net users across
the world. From these online collaborations, they are inventing new
forms of rhythmic expression: midi-jamming, interactive music,
cyber-trance.

As other media technologies converge into the Net, all forms of cultural
production are slowly integrating into the hi-tech gift economy. Even
television and film-making will soon be transformed by the possibilities
of interactive creativity. Despite their power and wealth, the
multi-media multinationals can only inhibit this economic
transformation. Quite spontaneously, the users of the Net are adopting
more efficient and enjoyable ways of working together. At the dawn of
the new millennium, many Americans are now experiencing the practical
benefits of cyber-communism:

  -------------------- ---------------------
  commodity            gift
  enclosure            disclosure
  copyright            piracy
  fixed                fluid
  product              process
  proprietary          open source
  digital encryption   free download
  original recording   latest remix
  scarcity             abundance
  alienation           friendship
  market competition   network communities
  e-commerce           cyber-communism
  -------------------- ---------------------

## The Market on the Commons

Compared with the rest of humanity, the inhabitants of the USA are
already very privileged. Although still denied adequate welfare
provision, most Americans not only consume more goods and services, but
also enjoy greater democratic liberties than the majority of the world’s
population. Over the past two hundred years, the continual expansion and
intensification of commodity exchange has massively raised the
productivity of collective labour in the USA. Regulated by the federal
government and local states, rival entrepreneurs have competed to build
an increasingly complex and interdependent economic system. According to
almost all American politicians, executives and pundits, the next stage
of the marketisation of society is being pioneered at the cutting-edge
of technology: the Net. As in the past, the enclosure of new types of
collective labour will inevitably raise living standards and extend
personal freedoms within the USA. There is no alternative to the
organising principle of the existing relations of production:
*work-as-commodity*.

Ironically, the revenge of Saint-Simon is now being visited upon his
American false disciples. As in the former Soviet Union, constant
increases in the forces of production are threatening the dominant
relations of production. Far from being the apotheosis of commodity
exchange, the social and technical structures of computer-mediated
communications embody an alternative form of collective labour: the gift
economy. If individuals were forced to collaborate primarily through
e-commerce, their opportunities to participate within interactive
creativity would be very limited. The full potential of the productive
forces of the Net can only be realised by adopting the most advanced
relations of production: cyber-communism.

At such historical moments, the proponents of reactionary modernism are
thrown into an existential crisis. Despite their deep ideological
differences, almost all right-wing intellectuals have the same goal:
economic development without social progress. Sometimes for decades,
ruling elites can successfully combine these contradictory aims of
reactionary modernism. However, the continual growth of the forces of
production will eventually undermine the existing relations of
production. Sooner or later, the supporters of reactionary modernism are
forced to make a hard choice: economic growth or social stasis. For
instance, the followers of Stalinist communism were confronted by this
dilemma at the end of the 1980s. Wanting to catch up with their Western
neighbours, most Eastern European politicians, executives and
intellectuals accepted the demise of the totalitarian state which
provided their livelihoods. In contrast, the Serbian ruling elite
decided to choose another option: destroying the forces of production.
Fearful of losing their wealth and power, they launched wars and ‘ethnic
cleansing’ to block any further social and economic progress. Instead of
moving towards the utopian future, their totalitarian state headed in
another direction: ‘the flight from modernity’.[^118]

Within the USA, there are also powerful groups championing reactionary
anti-modernism: religious fundamentalists, white supremacists and the
gun lobby. As in Serbia, some influential people are willing to
sacrifice economic growth to maintain the existing social order.
However, most of those with power and wealth would like to avoid to
making this choice. Instead, they want to update reactionary modernism
for the age of the Net. Within right-wing American politics, hi-tech
neoliberalism has long been the optimistic alternative to traditional
conservatism. Far from fearing the future, its prophets confidently
predict that economic progress will eventually liberate humanity. Unable
to use the ‘L-word’ for peculiar historical reasons, American
neoliberals even describe themselves as ‘libertarians’: a moniker taken
from revolutionary left-wing anarchists.

This optimistic form of conservatism is easily adapted for right-wing
analyses of the Net. For instance, the proponents of the Californian
Ideology still believe that constant technological change can be
reconciled with the preservation of social hierarchy.[^119] Like their
conservative forebears, these gurus often claim that their contradictory
aims will be realised by mystical means: the Gaia mind, post-humans and
memetics. More importantly, they also advocate a practical method for
perpetuating reactionary modernism: the hybridisation of the commodity
and the gift.

Like pioneers in the Wild West, cyber-entrepreneurs are seizing all
opportunities to enclose the newly-opened electronic frontier. At the
cutting-edge of convergence, the profits of commercial companies now
depend upon the rapid expansion of the hi-tech gift economy.[^120] The
hardware and software for accessing the Net can be sold as commodities
by large companies: IBM, Sun, Microsoft. The circulation of free
information among users can be enclosed within commercial sites: AOL,
Yahoo!, GeoCities. Instead of resisting all changes, the digerati must
embrace some social advances to reap the material benefits of
technological progress. The lucky few have discovered a new way of
achieving the American dream: the enclosure of cyber-communist labour
into digital capitalist property.[^121] Most famously, this bizarre
union of opposites underpins the frenzied speculation in Net stocks.
Each moment of interactive creativity is a potential source of profits.
If the correct hybrid of gift and commodity can be found, collective
labour will immediately transmute into individual wealth. Excited by the
riches of some cyber-entrepreneurs, many Americans are now speculating
on the same assumption about the Net: ‘...communism is (...) a
*generalisation* and *consummation* of (...) private property.’[^122]

For nearly thirty years, the prophets of hi-tech neoliberalism have
identified economic growth with social stasis. In many sectors, they
have advocated old-fashioned methods for raising profits: extending
hours, reducing wages, speeding-up production, cutting welfare and
increasing pollution. Yet, within the Net, these gurus champion the
synthesis of both technological innovation and social progress. For the
commodification of cyberspace is impossible without some accommodation
with the gift economy. Even the increasing importance of e-commerce is
facilitated by the non-commercial structure of the Net. The cost of
entry into the digital marketplace is so low due to the absence of
proprietary barriers. Small companies now have access to
computer-mediated-communications once only available to government
agencies, financial institutions and multinational corporations.
Cutting-out the middlemen, many providers of goods and services can
increase their profits by dealing directly with suppliers and customers
over the Net. Excited by these developments, the proponents of the
Californian Ideology believe that the freest of all free markets is now
being held on the commons of cyberspace.[^123]

## The Purity of the Gift

Opposed to this invasion by commercial interests, some left-wing
activists are reviving a purist vision of the gift. The enclosure of the
Net will be prevented by refusing any compromise with the
commodity.[^124] This revolutionary position takes its inspiration from
1960s hippie radicalism. Over thirty years ago, many young people
rebelled against the socio-economic systems of both the USA and the
Soviet Union. The material benefits of modernity no longer compensated
for the political authoritarianism and cultural conformity imposed by
industrialism. Disillusioned with the hi-tech future, these hippies
sought inspiration from the tribal past. While many were simply
lifestyle tourists, others were looking for a revolutionary alternative
to modernity. Crucially, some left-wing intellectuals believed that this
utopia could be found in the gift economy of Polynesian tribes: the
potlatch.[^125]

For radical hippies, this gift economy was the complete antithesis of
capitalism. Instead of accumulating surpluses, individuals in these
primitive societies gained prestige by giving away their wealth at
public celebrations. If market competition required alienating work to
produce ever more goods and services, the potlatch involved the
pleasurable destruction of excess resources. While the modern commodity
imposed hierarchy and utilitarianism, the primitive gift encouraged
equality and hedonism. Rejecting work-as-commodity, the New Left
proclaimed a new organising principle for their utopian society:
*waste-as-gift*.[^126]

Many years later, this revolutionary anti-modernism still influences
radical analyses of computer-mediated communications. Although emerging
at the cutting-edge of technology, the gift economy of the Net can
easily be confused with the potlatch of primitive societies. These
tribal attitudes are also be found within dance music, free parties,
protest movements and other forms of ‘DIY culture’.[^127] Imitating
their hippie elders, left-wing Net activists emphasise the autonomy of
these gift relationships from the corruption of commodity exchange.
Rejecting any hybridisation, they champion the destruction of private
property through the piracy of copyright material: waste-as-gift.
Instead of being bought and sold, information will become freely
available to everyone participating within the online potlatch.

Unfortunately, this revival of revolutionary anti-modernism also has
reactionary implications. As in earlier times, left-wing intellectuals
are tempted to see themselves as a vanguard leading the unenlightened
masses. Drawn from the intermediate layer, they champion the ‘refusal of
work’ to symbolise their superiority over the rest of the working class.
Although deprived of the Soviet Union, some members of the revolutionary
minority will still apologise for foreign dictatorships which resist
American hegemony. Despite the advent of new information technologies,
old political habits are difficult to discard. The revolutionary
rhetoric of hippie communism is haunted by the reactionary practice of
Stalinist communism.[^128]

## The American Road to Communism

Within the USA, this left-wing vision of the pure gift remains
marginalised. Ever since independence, a fervent belief in private
enterprise has defined American exceptionalism. During the Cold War, no
patriot could support the revolutionary ideology of the national enemy.
Even today, many people still virulently oppose the public provision of
welfare services considered indispensable in other developed
countries.[^129] Yet, these same right-wing Americans are happily
participating in the construction of cyber-communism. Quite
spontaneously, they adopt the working methods which are most beneficial
to their own interests. Sometimes, they want to engage in e-commerce. At
other times, they prefer to collaborate within the hi-tech gift economy.
Like everyone else, conservative Americans choose cyber-communism for
pragmatic reasons.

Despite their addiction to free market nostrums, Americans have long
preferred practical solutions over ideological correctness. Sceptical
about the theoretical obsessions of Europeans, they have always been
proud of their ‘Yankee pragmatism’.[^130] Updating this tradition for
the Net, most Americans simply ignore the widening discrepancy between
their political beliefs and their everyday activities. Although forced
to talk like neoliberals, they often choose to act like communists
within cyberspace. For the literal application of the Californian
Ideology would immediately remove many of the benefits of the Net. Not
surprisingly, few Americans will openly admit to their pleasure in
sinning against the national myth. While the reformist demand for a
public health system remains obviously left-wing, the subversive
implications of circulating information as gifts are literally
unthinkable. Without any self-doubt, Eric Raymond can be simultaneously
a passionate advocate of the decommodisation of software and ‘...a
self-described neo-pagan \[right-wing\] libertarian who enjoys shooting
semi-automatic weapons...’[^131]

Among Americans, cyber-communism is the love that dares not speak its
name. No one talks about what everyone is doing. Above all, the
historical significance of their collective behaviour on the Net can
never be discussed. Within everyday life, people have always given gifts
to each other. Many social activities are already organised by voluntary
labour and with donated resources. The DIY culture is the celebration of
doing-things-for-yourself in all aspects of life from politics to
music.[^132] Now, with the advent of the Net, this gift economy is
challenging market competition at the cutting-edge of modernity. For
only these new relations of production can fully realise the social and
technical potential of its advanced productive forces. When digital
gifts are freely circulated, people are able to participate within
interactive creativity. As information is incessantly reproduced, the
quantity of collective labour embodied in each copy is soon reduced to
almost nothing. Under these social and technical conditions, circulating
information as gifts can be not only more enjoyable, but also more
efficient than commodity exchange. Although appreciating the benefits of
e-commerce, Americans are enthusiastically participating within an
alternative form of collective labour: cyber-communism.

In earlier times, the abolition of capitalism was envisaged in
apocalyptic terms: revolutionary uprisings, mass mobilisations and
modernising dictatorships. In contrast, cyber-communism is now an
unremarkable everyday experience within the USA. The users of the Net
are spontaneously adopting more enjoyable and efficient ways of working
together. Instead of destroying the market economy, Americans are
engaged in the slow process of *superseding* capitalism.[^133] In this
dialectical movement, hi-tech neoliberals perfect the existing relations
of production by developing e-commerce: work-as-commodity. Reacting
against this enclosure of cyberspace, left-wing activists destroy
information property within the online potlatch: waste-as-gift. For
those nostalgic for ideological certainty, there can be no compromise
between these contradictory visions of the Net.

Yet, the synthesis of these dialectical opposites must happen for
pragmatic reasons. Often Net users benefit more from working together
through circulating gifts than from taking part in e-commerce. Living
within a prosperous society, many Americans are no longer solely
motivated by monetary rewards. With sufficient time and money, they will
also work to gain the respect of their peers for their efforts.
Increasing numbers of people are now satisfying this desire for
recognition within network communities. Individuals receive praise and
friendship from their fellow-members by making excellent contributions
to collective projects. Within the Net, the rise in the productive
forces encourages a more advanced form of collective labour:
*work-as-gift*.[^134]

> *...Work is born from the Desire for Recognition (...) and it
> preserves itself and evolves in relation to this same Desire.*[^135]

The dialectical process of superseding capitalism is marked by the
evolving syntheses of gift and commodity within the Net. During this
transition, neither the disclosure nor the enclosure of collective
labour can be assumed. If the correct hybrid isn’t found, individuals
working on a collective project can quickly disappear to more agreeable
locations within cyberspace. Sometimes, they will look for monetary
rewards. On many occasions, they will prefer the freedom of autonomous
labour. Depending upon circumstances, both these desires need to be
partially realised in a successful hybrid of gift and commodity. During
the last two hundred years, the intimate bonds of kinship and friendship
have simultaneously inhibited and underpinned the impersonal
relationships needed for rapid economic growth. The modern has always
co-existed with the traditional. Now, in the age of the Net, the
exchange of commodities is being both intensified and prevented by the
circulation of gifts. The modern must synthesise with the hyper-modern.

The gurus of the Californian Ideology emphasise the survival of social
hierarchy within these hybrid productive relations of the Net. Already,
successful cyber-entrepreneurs begin their careers by giving away their
most desirable products. If their brand is widely adopted, they hope to
make money by providing supporting services and products to its users. A
lucky few digerati can become very wealthy by selling shares to Wall
Street speculators.[^136] Yet, even in this conservative synthesis of
gift and commodity, copyright has ceased to be the precondition of
information production. Every consumer is now won with promotional
items. Unable to resist the technical possibilities of digital
convergence, some neoliberal ideologues accept the eventual
disappearance of copyright.[^137] Since plagiarism will soon become
ubiquitous, cyber-entrepreneurs must adopt other ways of commodifying
the Net: real-time services, advertising, merchandising. The hi-tech
aristocracy can only protect their privileges by continually making
gifts to the masses.

This hybridisation of productive relations is prevalent across the
hi-tech industries. For instance, many people gain employment only after
serving an apprenticeship within network communities. If their work is
respected among their peers, they can join the emerging intermediate
layer employed by e-commerce companies: the digital artisans. Although
operating outside the academy, the gift of information still facilitates
the sale of labour. According to the prophecies of Saint-Simon,
innovative workers in advanced industries should be pioneering the
economic and cultural conditions for social emancipation. The
intermediate layer is the vanguard of modernity. Faithful to this role,
digital artisans are making many technological and aesthetic advances.
Despite having to sell their creativity for money, their ways of working
are often egalitarian and collaborative. Once again, the intermediate
layer is inventing the future.

Yet, even this synthesis is already being superseded at the cutting-edge
of modernity. The heroic minority is no longer alone. After two
centuries of economic growth, ordinary people are also able to adopt
advanced productive relations. Within the Net, working together by
circulating gifts is now a daily experience for millions of people. As
well as in their jobs, individuals also collaborate on collective
projects in their free time. Freed from the immediate disciplines of the
marketplace, work can increasingly become a gift. The enlightened few
are no longer needed to lead the masses towards the future. For the
majority of Net users are already participating within the productive
relations of cyber-communism. Everyday, they are sending emails, taking
part in listservers, making websites, contributing to newsgroups and
participating within online conferences. Having no need to sell
information as commodities, they spontaneously work together by
circulating gifts. All across the world, politicians, executives and
pundits are inspired by the rapid expansion of e-commerce in the USA.
Mesmerised by neoliberal ideology, they fail to notice that most
information is already circulating as gifts within the Net. Engaged in
superseding capitalism, Americans are successfully constructing the
utopian future in the present: cyber-communism.

> *No social order is ever destroyed before all the productive forces
> for which it is sufficient have been developed, and new superior
> relations of production never replace older ones before the material
> conditions for their existence have matured within the framework of
> the old society. (...) The bourgeois mode of production is the last
> antagonistic form of the social process of production – (...) an
> antagonism that emanates from the individuals’ social conditions of
> existence – but the productive forces developing within bourgeois
> society create also the material conditions for a solution of this
> antagonism. The prehistory of humanity accordingly closes with this
> social formation.*[^138]

## The Dialectics of Cyber-Communism
 
  ------------------------------- ------------------------------
  The Positive:                   work-as-commodity
                                  
                                  e-commerce
                                  
                                  reactionary modernism

  The Negation:                   waste-as-gift
                                  
                                  potlatch
                                  
                                  revolutionary anti-modernism

  The Negation of the Negation:   work-as-gift
                                  
                                  network communities
                                  
                                  revolutionary modernism
  ------------------------------- ------------------------------

Respect due: Andrej Skerlep, Andy Allenson, Andy Cameron, Christopher
May, Dick Pountain, John Armitage, John Barker, Helen Barbrook, Jim
McLellan, John Barker, John Wyver, Lance Strate, Les Levidow, Luther
Blissett, Maren Hartmann, nettime, Rhiannon Patterson, Rishab Ghosh,
Robin Hamman, Roya Jakoby, Simon Schaffer, Vuk Cosic, Warwick Metcalfe
and the staff & students of the Hypermedia Research Centre, University
of Westminster, London.

[^1]: For over 25 years, experts have been predicting the imminent
    arrival of the information age, see Alain Touraine, *La Société
    Post-Industrielle*, Paris: Editions Denoël, 1969; Zbigniew
    Brzezinski, *Between Two Ages*, New York: Viking Press, 1970; Daniel
    Bell, *The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society*, New York: Basic
    Books, 1973; Alvin Toffler, *The Third Wave*, London: Pan, 1980;
    Simon Nora and Alain Minc, *The Computerisation of Society*,
    Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980; and Ithiel de Sola Pool,
    *Technologies of Freedom*, Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 1983.

[^2]: See Martin Bangemann, *Europe and the Global Information Society*,
    Brussels: European Union, 1994; and the programme and abstracts for
    *Virtual Futures ’95*, Conference by CCRU, Warwick University,
    Coventry, 25-28 May 1995,
    http://virtualfutures.co.uk/conferences/1995.

[^3]: See Mitch Kapor, ‘Where is the Digital Highway Really Heading?’,
    *Wired* 1:3 (July/August 1993), pp. 53-59, 94,
    http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/1.03/kapor.on.nii.html.

[^4]: See Mike Davis, *City of Quartz*; London: Verso, 1990; Richard
    Walker, ‘California Rages Against the Dying of the Light’, *New Left
    Review* 209 (January-February 1995), pp. 42-74; and the records of
    Ice-T, Snoop Dog, Dr. Dre, Ice Cube, NWA and many other West Coast
    rappers.

[^5]: See George Katsiaficas, *The Imagination of the New Left: A Global
    Analysis of 1968,* Boston: South End Press, 1987, p. 124.

[^6]: Jerry Rubin, ‘An Emergency Letter to My Brothers and Sisters in
    the Movement’, in Peter Stansill and David Zane Mairowitz (eds),
    *BAMN: Outlaw Manifestos and Ephemera 1965-70*, London: Penguin,
    1971, p. 244. The Yippies were members of the Youth International
    Party – an influential group within the American New Left of the
    late-1960s and early-1970s.

[^7]: For the key role played by popular culture in the self-identity of
    the American New Left, see Katsiaficas, *The Imagination of the New
    Left*; and Charles Reich, *The Greening of America*, New York:
    Random House, 1970. For a description of the lives of white-collar
    workers in 1950s America, see William Whyte, *The Organization Man*,
    New York: Simon & Schuster, 1956.

[^8]: In a best-selling novel of the mid-1970s, the northern half of the
    West Coast has seceded from the rest of the USA to form a hippie
    utopia, see Ernest Callenbach, *Ecotopia*, New York: Bantam, 1975.
    This idealisation of Californian community life can also be found in
    John Brunner, *The Shockwave Rider*, London: Methuen, 1975; and even
    in later works, such as Kim Stanley Robinson, *Pacific Edge*,
    London: Grafton, 1990.

[^9]: For an analysis of attempts to create direct democracy through
    media technologies, see Richard Barbrook, *Media Freedom: The
    Contradictions of Communications in the Age of Modernity*, London:
    Pluto 1995, pp. 75-189.

[^10]: Marshall McLuhan, *Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man*,
    London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964, pp. 255-256. Also see Marshall
    McLuhan and Quentin Fiore, *The Medium is the Massage*, London:
    Penguin, 1967; and Gerald Emanuel Stern (ed.), *McLuhan: Hot &
    Cool*, London: Penguin, 1968.

[^11]: See John Downing, *Radical Media*, Boston: South End Press, 1984.

[^12]: Arthur Kroker and Michael A. Weinstein, *Data Trash: The Theory
    of the Virtual Class*, Montreal: New World Perspectives, 1994, p.
    15. This analysis follows that of those futurologists who thought
    that ‘knowledge workers’ were the embryo of a new ruling class, see
    Bell, *The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society*; and economists
    who believe that ‘symbolic analysts’ will be the dominant section of
    the workforce under globalised capitalism, see Robert Reich, *The
    Work of Nations: A Blueprint for the Future*, London: Simon &
    Schuster, 1991. In contrast, back in the 1960s, some New Left
    theorists believed that these scientific-technical workers were
    leading the struggle for social liberation through their factory
    occupations and demands for self-management, see Serge Mallet, *The
    New Working Class*, Nottingham: Spokesman Books, 1975.

[^13]: See Dennis Hayes, *Behind the Silicon Curtain*, London: Free
    Association Books, 1989, for a description of contract work in
    Silicon Valley; and, for a fictional treatment of the same subject,
    see Douglas Coupland, *Microserfs*, London: Flamingo, 1995. For more
    theoretical examinations of post-Fordist labour organisation, see
    Alain Lipietz, *L’Audace ou l’enlisement*, Paris: Éditions la
    Découverte, 1984; and *Mirages and Miracles*, London: Verso, 1987;
    Benjamin Coriat, *L’Atelier et le robot*, Paris: Christian Bourgois
    Éditeur, 1990; and Toni Negri, *Revolution Retrieved: Selected
    Writings on Marx, Keynes, Capitalist Crisis & New Social Subjects
    1967-83*, London: Red Notes, 1988.

[^14]: As Seymour Martin Lipset points out, anti-statism liberalism has
    – and still is – the underlying basis of American politics on both
    the Right and the Left: ‘These \[liberal\] values were evident in
    the 20th century fact that (...) the United States not only lacked a
    viable socialist party, but also has never developed a British or
    European-style Conservative or Tory party.’ See Seymour Martin
    Lipset, *American Exceptionalism: A Double-Edged Sword*, New York:
    W.W. Norton, 1996, pp. 31-32.

[^15]: For McLuhan’s success on the corporate junket circuit, see Tom
    Wolfe, ‘What if He is Right?’ in *The Pump House Gang*, London:
    Bantam Books, 1968, pp. 107-133. For the use of his ideas by more
    conventional thinkers, see Brzezinski, *Between Two Ages*; Bell,
    *The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society*; Toffler, *The Third
    Wave*; and Sola Pool, *Technologies of Freedom*.

[^16]: Heroic males are common throughout classic sci-fi novels, see
    D.D. Harriman in Robert Heinlein, *The Man Who Sold the Moon*, New
    York: Signet, 1950; or the leading characters in Isaac Asimov, *The
    Foundation Trilogy*, New York: Gnome Press, 1953; *I, Robot*,
    London: Panther, 1968; and *The Rest of the Robots*, London:
    Panther, 1968. Hagbard Celine – a more psychedelic version of this
    male archetype – is the central character in Robert Shea and Robert
    Anton Wilson, *The Illuminati Trilogy*, New York: Dell, 1975. In the
    time chart of ‘future history’ at the front of Robert Heinlein’s
    novel, it predicts that, after a period of social crisis caused by
    rapid technological advance, stability would be restored in the
    1980s and 1990s through ‘...an opening of new frontiers and a return
    to nineteenth-century economy’! Heinlein, *The Man Who Sold the
    Moon*, pp. 8-9.

[^17]: See Shoshana Zuboff, *In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future
    of Work and Power*, New York: Heinemann, 1988. Of course, this
    analysis is derived from Karl Marx, *Grundrisse*, London: Penguin,
    1973; and *Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume 1: The
    Process of the Production of Capital*, London: Penguin, 1976.

[^18]: See Howard Rheingold, *The Virtual Community: Finding Connection
    in a Computerised World*, London: Secker & Warburg, 1994; and his
    personal website, http://rheingold.com/.

[^19]: See the gushing interview with the Tofflers in Peter Schwartz,
    ‘Shock Wave (Anti) Warrior’, *Wired* 1:5 (November 1993), pp. 61-65
    120-122, http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/1.05/toffler.html;
    and, for the magazine’s characteristic ambiguity over the Speaker of
    the House’s reactionary political programme, see the aptly named
    interview with Newt Gingrich in Esther Dyson, ‘Friend and Foe’,
    *Wired* 3:8 (August 1995), pp. 106-112, 160-162,
    http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/3.08/newt.html.

[^20]: Progress and Freedom Foundation, *Cyberspace and the American
    Dream: A Magna Carta for the Knowledge Age*, p. 5,
    http://www.pff.org/issues-pubs/futureinsights/fi1.2magnacarta.html.

[^21]: See Kevin Kelly, *Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines*,
    London: Fourth Estate, 1994. For a critique of this book, see
    Richard Barbrook, ‘The Pinnochio Theory’, *Science as Culture*,
    5:24.3 (1996), pp. 459-66,
    http://www.imaginaryfutures.net/2007/04/08/pinnochio-theory-by-richard-barbrook.

[^22]: Progress and Freedom Foundation, *Cyberspace and the American
    Dream*, p. 13. Toffler and friends also proudly proclaim that:
    ‘America (...) remains the land of individual freedom, and this
    freedom clearly extends to cyberspace’, Progress and Freedom
    Foundation, *Cyberspace and the American Dream*, p. 6. Also see
    Kapor, ‘Where is the Digital Highway Really Heading?’

[^23]: See Simon Schaffer, ‘Babbage’s Intelligence: Calculating Engines
    and the Factory System’,
    http://www.imaginaryfutures.net/2007/04/16/babbages-intelligence-by-simon-schaffer.

[^24]: See Jon Palfreman and Doron Swade, *The Dream Machine: Exploring
    the Computer Age*, London: BBC, 1991, pp. 32-36, for an account of
    how a lack of state intervention meant that Nazi Germany lost the
    opportunity to build the world’s first electronic computer. In 1941
    the German High Command refused further funding to Konrad Zuze, who
    had pioneered the use of binary code, stored programs and electronic
    logic gates.

[^25]: DIY means Do-It-Yourself – and is used to describe community,
    hobbyist and amateur initiatives.

[^26]: See Rheingold, *The Virtual Community*; and
    http://rheingold.com/.

[^27]: As President Clinton’s Labour Secretary puts it: ‘Recall that
    through the post-war era the Pentagon has quietly been in charge of
    helping American corporations move ahead with technologies like jet
    engines, airframes, transistors, integrated circuits, new materials,
    lasers, and optic fibres (...) The Pentagon and the 600 national
    laboratories which work with it and with the Department of Energy
    are the closest thing America has to Japan’s well-known Ministry of
    International Trade and Industry.’ Reich, *The Work of Nations*, p.
    159.

[^28]: For an account of how these cultural innovations emerged from the
    early acid scene, see Tom Wolfe, *The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test*,
    New York: Bantam Books, 1968. Interestingly, one of the drivers of
    the famous Merry Pranksters’ bus was Stewart Brand, who is now a
    leading contributor to *Wired*.

[^29]: Hayes, *Behind the Silicon Curtain*, points out that the American
    computer industry has already been encouraged by the Pentagon to
    form cartels against foreign competition. The head of Microsoft
    admitted that he was late in realising the ‘massive structural
    change’ being caused by the Net, see Bill Gates, ‘The Bill Gates
    Column’, *The Guardian*, On-Line Section, 20 July 1995, p. 14.

[^30]: See Rheingold’s http://rheingold.com/; and Kapor, ‘Where is the
    Digital Highway Really Heading?’ Despite the libertarian instincts
    of both these writers, their infatuation with the era of the
    Founding Fathers is shared by the neo-fascist Militia and Patriot
    movements, see Chip Berlet, *Armed Militias, Right Wing Populism,
    and Scapegoating*, Somerville: Political Research Associates, 1995.

[^31]: See the hacker heroes in William Gibson, *Neuromancer*, London:
    Grafton, 1984; *Count Zero*, London: Grafton, 1986; and *Mona Lisa
    Overdrive*, London: Grafton, 1989; or in Bruce Sterling, (ed.)
    *Mirrorshades*, London: Paladin, 1988. A prototype of this sort of
    anti-hero is Deckard, the existential hunter of replicants in the
    movie *Bladerunner* (dir. Ridley Scott, 1982).

[^32]: Thomas Jefferson believed that people of African descent could
    not be members of the Lockean social contract which bound together
    citizens of the American republic. One commentator explains his
    hypocritical philosophical justification for this racist position:
    ‘The rights of man (...) while theoretically and ideally the birth
    right of every human being, applied in practice in the United States
    only to white men: the black slaves were excluded from consideration
    because, while admittedly human beings, they were also property, and
    where the rights of man conflicted with the rights of property,
    property took precedence.’ John Miller, *The Wolf by the Ears:
    Thomas Jefferson and Slavery*, New York: Free Press, 1977, p. 13.
    Jefferson’s opposition to slavery was at best rhetorical. In a
    letter of 22 April 1820, he disingenuously suggested that the best
    way to encourage the abolition of slavery would be to legalise the
    private ownership of human beings in all States of the Union and the
    frontier territories! He claimed that ‘...their diffusion over a
    greater surface would make them individually happier, and
    proportionally facilitate the accomplishment of their emancipation,
    by dividing the burden on a greater number of coadjutors \[i.e.
    slave-owners\].’ Merill Peterson (ed.), *The Portable Thomas
    Jefferson*, New York: Viking Press, 1975, p. 568. For a description
    of life on his slave plantation, also see Paul Wilstach, *Jefferson
    and Monticello*, London: William Heinemann, 1925.

[^33]: For California’s turn to the Right, see Walker, ‘California Rages
    Against the Dying of the Light’.

[^34]: See Dyson, ‘Friend and Foe’. Esther Dyson collaborated with the
    Tofflers in the writing of the Progress and Freedom Foundation’s
    *Cyberspace and the American Dream* – a futurist manifesto designed
    to win votes for Gingrich from members of the virtual class.

[^35]: For the rise of the fortified suburbs, see Davis, *City of
    Quartz*; and *Urban Control: the Ecology of Fear*, New Jersey: Open
    Magazine, 1992. These ‘gated suburbs’ provide the inspiration for
    the alienated background of many cyberpunk sci-fi novels, such as
    Neal Stephenson, *Snow Crash*, New York: Roc, 1992.

[^36]: See Hayes, *Behind the Silicon Curtain*.

[^37]: See Reginald Stuart, ‘High-Tech Redlining: Are Afro-Americans
    Being Frozen out of the New Communications Network’, *Utne Reader*
    68 (March-April 1995), p. 73.

[^38]: See Wilstach, *Jefferson and Monticello*.

[^39]: See Hayes, *Behind the Silicon Curtain*.

[^40]: For an exposition of their futurist programme, see The
    Extropians, *F.A.Q*.,
    http://www.ultim8team.com/modules/future/extropy\_faq.php.

[^41]: See Gibson, *Neuromancer*, *Count Zero*, and *Mona Lisa
    Overdrive*.

[^42]: See Asimov, *The Foundation Trilogy*, *I, Robot*, and *The Rest
    of the Robots*.

[^43]: See William Gibson and Sandy Sandfort, ‘Disneyland with the Death
    Penalty’, *Wired* 1:4 (September/October 1993), pp. 51-55 and
    114-115, http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive//1.04/gibson.html.
    Since these articles are an attack on Singapore, it is ironic that
    the real Disneyland is in California, whose repressive penal code
    includes the death penalty!

[^44]: For the report which led to the creation of Minitel, see Nora and
    Minc, *The Computerisation of Society*. An account of the early
    years of Minitel can be found in Michel Marchand, *The Minitel Saga:
    A French Success Story*, Paris: Larousse, 1988.

[^45]: According to a poll carried out during the 1995 presidential
    elections, 67% of the French population supported the proposition
    that ‘the state must intervene more in the economic life of our
    country’, see *Le Monde*, ‘Une Majorité de français souhaitent un
    vrai “chef” pour un vrai “état”’, *Le Monde*, 11 April 1995, p. 6.

[^46]: For the influence of Jacobinism on French conceptions of
    democratic rights, see Barbrook, *Media Freedom*. Some French
    economists claim that the very different history of Europe has
    created a specific – and socially superior – model of capitalism,
    see Michel Albert, *Capitalism v. Capitalism*, New York: Four Wall
    Eight Windows, 1993; and Philippe Delmas, *Le Maître des horloges*,
    Paris: Éditions Odile Jacob, 1991.

[^47]: As John Maynard Keynes himself said: ‘“To dig holes in the
    ground”, paid for out of savings, will increase, not only
    employment, but the real national dividend of useful goods and
    services.’ John Maynard Keynes, *The General Theory of Employment,
    Interest and Money*, London: Macmillan, 1964, p. 220.

[^48]: See Keith Taylor (ed.), *Henri Saint-Simon 1760-1825: Selected
    Writings on Science, Industry and Social Organisation*, London:
    Croom Helm, 1975; and John E. Bowlt (ed.), *Russian Art of the
    Avant-Garde: Theory and Criticism*, London: Thames & Hudson, 1976.

[^49]: As Goldie, a London DJ, puts it: ‘We have to take it forwards and
    take the drums ’n’ bass and push it and push it and push it. I
    remember when we were saying that it couldn’t be pushed anymore.
    It’s been pushed tenfold since then...’ Tony Marcus, ‘The War is
    Over’, *Mixmag* (August 1995), p. 46.

[^50]: For information on Anti-rom and *J’s Joint*, see the Antirom and
    Hypermedia Research Centre’s websites: http://www.antirom.com/,
    http://www.hrc.wmin.ac.uk/.

[^51]: Henri de Saint-Simon, ‘Sketch of the New Political System’, in
    Taylor, *Henri Saint-Simon 1760-1825*, p. 203.

[^52]: See Stuart Hall and Martin Jacques (eds), *New Times: The
    Changing Face of Politics in the 1990s*, London: Lawrence & Wishart,
    1989.

[^53]: See Toffler, *The Third Wave*.

[^54]: See Sola Pool, *Technologies of Freedom*.

[^55]: See *The Californian Ideology* above.

[^56]: Louis Rossetto in David Hudson, ‘There’s no Government like no
    Government (Interview with Louis Rossetto)’, *San Francisco Bay
    Guardian*, 6 November 1996, p. 30.

[^57]: See John Greenwald, ‘Heroes of a Wild and Crazy Stock Ride’,
    *Time*, 3 August 1998, pp. 46-47.

[^58]: Daniel Kadlec, ‘Internet Mania’, *Time*, 18 January 1999, p. 1,
    http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,990028,00.html.

[^59]: See Larry Elliott, ‘Rise and Rise of the Super-Rich’, *The
    Guardian*, G2 section, 14 July 1999, pp. 2-3.

[^60]: See Jeffrey Herf, *Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture and
    Politics in Weimar and in the Third Reich*, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1984.

[^61]: See Friedrich Nietzsche, *Thus Spoke Zarathustra*, London:
    Penguin, 1961; and José Ortega y Gasset, *The Revolt of the Masses*,
    London: George Allen & Unwin, 1932.

[^62]: See Tony Elger, ‘Valorisation and “Deskilling”: A Critique of
    Braverman’, *Capital & Class* 7 (Spring 1979), pp. 58-99.

[^63]: Jerry Israel (ed.), *Building the Organisational Society: Essays
    on Associational Activities in Modern America*, New York: Free
    Press, 1972, pp. 2-3.

[^64]: See James Burnham, *The Managerial Revolution*, London: Penguin,
    1945.

[^65]: See McLuhan, *Understanding Media*.

[^66]: See Toffler, *The Third Wave*; Kelly, *Out of Control*; and Bell,
    *The Coming of Post-Industrial Society*.

[^67]: See Kroker and Weinstein, *Data Trash*.

[^68]: See Toffler, *The Third Wave*; Kelly, *Out of Control*; Hudson,
    ‘There’s no Government like no Government’; and Esther Dyson,
    *Release 2.0: A Design for Living in the Digital Age*, London:
    Viking, 1997.

[^69]: Louis Rossetto, ‘19th Century Nostrums Are not Solutions to 21st
    Century Problems: A Trans-Atlantic Jet Streamer on European Ideology
    and Political Eternal Returns’, *Mute* 4 (Winter/Spring 1996), p.
    17,
    http://www.metamute.org/editorial/articles/to-mutoids-re-californian-ideology.

[^70]: See Edward Bellamy, *Looking Backward*, London: Penguin, 1982;
    and H.G. Wells, *A Modern Utopia*, Thirsk: House of Stratus, 2002.

[^71]: See Crane Brinton, *The Jacobins: An Essay in the New History*,
    New York: Russell and Russell, 1961; and Barbrook, *Media Freedom*,
    pp. 19-37.

[^72]: Henri de Saint-Simon and Léon Halévy, ‘The Artist, the Scientist
    and the Industrial’, in Keith Taylor (ed.), *Henri Saint-Simon
    1760-1825: Selected Writings on Science, Industry and Social
    Organisation*, London: Croom Helm, 1975, p. 280.

[^73]: See Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of Political
    Economy*, Moscow: Progress, 1970, pp. 20-21; and Friedrich Engels
    *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific*, Beijing: Foreign Languages
    Press, 1975 pp. 74-101.

[^74]: See V.I. Lenin, *What Is To Be Done? Burning Questions of Our
    Movement*, Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1975.

[^75]: See V.I. Lenin, *The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade
    Kautsky*, Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1975.

[^76]: See V.I. Lenin, *Will the Bolsheviks Maintain Power?*, London:
    Martin Lawrence, 1932; and Nikolai Bukharin, *Economics of the
    Transformation Period* (with Lenin’s critical notes), London: Pluto,
    1971.

[^77]: See Ante Ciliga, *The Russian Enigma*, London: Ink Links, 1979,
    pp. 261-291.

[^78]: See Joseph Stalin, ‘The Results of the First Five-Year Plan:
    Report Delivered to the Joint Plenum of the Central Committee and
    Central Control Commission of the C.P.S.U. (B), 7 January 1933’, in
    *Problems of Leninism*, Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House,
    1954, pp. 512-520.

[^79]: Stalin, ‘The Results of the First Five-Year Plan’, pp. 541-542.

[^80]: See Mikhail Bakunin, ‘Letter to Sergei Nechaev, June 2nd, 1870’,
    in Arthur Lehning (ed.), *Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings*,
    London: Jonathan Cape, 1973, pp. 182-194; and Karl Marx, *Capital: a
    critique of political economy, Volume 3: the process of capitalist
    production as a whole*, London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1959, pp.
    435-441.

[^81]: See Milo van Djilas, *The New Class: An Analysis of the Communist
    System,* London: Unwin Books, 1966.

[^82]: See Walt Rostow, *The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist
    Manifesto,* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960.

[^83]: See Francis Fukuyama *The End of History*, London: Penguin, 1992.

[^84]: See Hudson, ‘There’s no Government like no Government’, p. 33.

[^85]: See Jon Katz, ‘The Digital Citizen’, *Wired* 5:12 (December
    1997), pp. 71-72,
    http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/5.12/netizen\_pr.html pages.

[^86]: See Herbert Schiller, ‘The Global Information Highway’, in James
    Brook and Iain Boal (eds), *Resisting the Virtual Life: The Culture
    and Politics of Information*, San Francisco: City Lights, 1995, pp.
    17-33; and Brian Winston, *Media, Technology and Society*, London:
    Routledge, 1998, pp. 321-336.

[^87]: Djilas, *The New Class*, pp. 41-42.

[^88]: Eric Raymond, ‘Homesteading the Noosphere’, *First Monday* 3:10
    (October 1998), p. 9,
    http://www.firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/621/542.

[^89]: See Negri, *Revolution Retrieved.*

[^90]: See André Gorz, *Critique of Economic Reason*, London: Verso,
    1989.

[^91]: Marx, *Grundrisse*, p. 700.

[^92]: Warren Hagstrom, ‘Gift Giving as an Organisational Principle in
    Science’, in Barry Barnes and David Edge (eds), *Science in Context:
    Readings in the Sociology of Science*, Milton Keynes: Open
    University, 1982, p. 29.

[^93]: See Rishab Ghosh, ‘Cooking Pot Markets: An Economic Model for the
    Trade in Free Goods and Services on the Internet’, *First Monday*
    3:3 (2 March 1998), p. 10,
    http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/580/501.

[^94]: See Mark Geise, ‘From ARPAnet to the Internet: A Cultural Clash
    and its Implications in Framing the Debate on the Information
    Superhighway’, in Lance Strate, Ron Jacobson and Stephanie B. Gibson
    (eds), *Communications and Cyberspace: Social Interaction in an
    Electronic Environment*, New Jersey: Hampton Press, 1996, pp.
    126-132.

[^95]: See Tim Berners-Lee, ‘The World Wide Web: Past, Present and
    Future’, p. 11, http://www.w3.org/People/Berners-Lee/1996/ppf.html.

[^96]: See Adam Smith, *An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
    Wealth of Nations: Volume 1 & Volume 2*, Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1976; and David Ricardo, *The Principles of Political
    Economy and Taxation*, London: Dent, 1973.

[^97]: Marx, *Capital Volume 1*, pp. 873-930.

[^98]: Midnight Notes Collective, ‘Introduction to the New Enclosures’,
    *Midnight Notes* 10 (Fall 1990), pp. 1-9.

[^99]: See Christopher May, ‘Thinking, Buying, Selling: Intellectual
    Property Rights in Political Economy’, *New Political Economy* 3:1
    (1998), pp. 68-73.

[^100]: Karl Marx, *Capital Volume 1*, p. 1044.

[^101]: See Christopher May, ‘Capital, Knowledge and Ownership:
    Intellectual Property Rights in Political Economy’, *New Political
    Economy* 3:1 (1998), pp. 59-78; John Frow, ‘Information as Gift and
    Commodity’, *New Left Review* 219 (September/October 1996), pp.
    89-108; and Vincent Porter, ‘Wanted: A New International Law to
    Protect Intellectual Property Rights on the GII’, *Intermedia* 23:4
    (August/September 1995), pp. 31-36.

[^102]: See Gary Wolf, ‘The Curse of Xanadu’, *Wired UK* (June 1995),
    pp. 70-85 and 112-113.

[^103]: See Ghosh, ‘Cooking Pot Markets’; and Bernard Lang, ‘Free
    Software For All: Freeware and the Issue of Intellectual Property’,
    *Le Monde Diplomatique* (January 1998),
    http://mondediplo.com/1998/01/12freesoft.

[^104]: See Tim Berners-Lee, ‘Realising the Full Potential of the Web’,
    p. 5, http://www.w3.org/1998/02/Potential.html.

[^105]: Neil Kleinman, ‘Don’t Fence Me In: Copyright, Property and
    Technology’, in Lance Strate, Ron Jacobson and Stephanie B. Gibson
    (eds), *Communications and Cyberspace: Social Interaction in an
    Electronic Environment*, New Jersey: Hampton Press, 1996, p. 76.

[^106]: See Rheingold, *The Virtual Community*, p. 12; and Robin Hamman,
    ‘Computer Networks Linking Network Communities: Effects of Computer
    Network Use Upon Pre-Existing Communities’,
    http://cybersoc.blogs.com/mphil.html.

[^107]: See Ghosh, ‘Cooking Pot Markets’; and Peter Kollock, ‘The
    Economics of Online Cooperation: Gifts and Public Goods in
    Cyberspace’, in Marc Smith and Peter Kollock (eds), *Communities in*
    *Cyberspace*, London: Routledge, 1999, pp. 220-239.

[^108]: Rheingold, *The Virtual Community*, p. 12.

[^109]: See Berners-Lee, ‘The World Wide Web’.

[^110]: See Andrew Leonard, ‘Let My Software Go!’, *Salon*, 30 March
    1998, http://www.salon.com/1998/03/30/feature947788266.

[^111]: See Keith Porterfield, ‘Information Wants to be Valuable: A
    Report from the First O’Reilly Perl Conference (19-21 August 1997)’,
    http://www.netaction.org/articles/freesoft.html.

[^112]: See Linux Online, *F.A.Q*.

[^113]: Eric Raymond, ‘The Cathedral and the Bazaar’, *First Monday* 3:3
    (March 1998), p. 7,
    http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/578.

[^114]: See John Chesterman and Andrew Lipman, *The Electronic Pirates:
    DIY Crime of the Century*, London: Comedia/Routledge, 1988 pp.
    36-45.

[^115]: See Sheryl Garratt, *Adventures in Wonderland: A Decade of Club
    Culture*, London: Headline, 1998 and Martin James, *State of Bass:
    Jungle – The Story so Far*, London: Boxtree, 1997.

[^116]: See Nathaniel Wice, ‘Sony Tries to Put MP3 Genie Back in
    Bottle’, *Time Digital,* 12 May 1999,
    http://web.archive.org/web/20000818213338/http://www.time.com/time/digital/daily/0,2822,24585,00.html.

[^117]: See Leonard, ‘Mutiny on the Net’.

[^118]: See Latinka Perovic, ‘The Flight from Modernity’, *Bosnia
    Report*, 28 May 1999,
    http://www.bosnia.org.uk/news/news/280599\_1.cfm.

[^119]: See *The Californian Ideology*.

[^120]: See Kevin Kelly, ‘New Rules for the New Economy: Twelve
    Dependable Principles for Thriving in a Turbulent World’, *Wired*
    5:9 (September 1997), pp. 140-144 and 186-197,
    http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/5.09/newrules.html.

[^121]: See Andrew Leonard, ‘The *Really* New Economy: Red Hat’s IPO’,
    *Salon*, 9 June 1999, http://www.salon.com/1999/06/09/red\_hat.

[^122]: Karl Marx, *Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844*,
    Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1961, p. 99.

[^123]: See Kelly, *Out of Control*; Hudson, ‘There’s no Government like
    no Government; and Dyson, *Release 2.0*.

[^124]: See Critical Art Ensemble, *Electronic Civil Disobedience and
    Other Unpopular Ideas*, New York: Autonomedia, 1996.

[^125]: See Marcel Mauss, *The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in
    Archaic Societies,* London: Routledge, 1990.

[^126]: See the Situationist International, ‘The Beginning of An Era’,
    in Ken Knabb (ed.), *Situationist International Anthology*,
    Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981; Jean Baudrillard, *The
    Mirror of Production*, St. Louis: Telos, 1975; and Toni Negri,
    ‘Capitalist Domination and Working Class Sabotage’, in Red Notes
    (ed.), *Working Class Autonomy and the Crisis: Italian Marxist Texts
    of the Theory and Practice of a Class Movement 1964-79*, London: Red
    Notes/CSE Books, 1979, pp. 92-138.

[^127]: See Elaine Brass and Sophie Koziell with Denise Searle (eds),
    *Gathering Force: DIY Culture – Radical Action for Those Tired of
    Waiting*, London: Big Issue, 1997; and George McKay (ed.), *DiY
    Culture: Party & Protest in Nineties Britain*, London: Verso, 1998.

[^128]: See Richard Barbrook, ‘The Holy Fools: Revolutionary Elitism in
    Cyberspace’, in Patricia Pisters (ed.), *The Micropolitics of Media
    Culture: Reading the Rhizomes of Deleuze and Guattari,* Amsterdam:
    Amsterdam University Press, 2001, pp. 159-175,
    http://www.imaginaryfutures.net/2007/04/13/the-holy-fools-long-mix-by-richard-barbrook.

[^129]: See Lipset, *American Exceptionalism*.

[^130]: See Alexis de Tocqueville, *Democracy in America: Volume 2*, New
    York: Vintage, 1975, pp. 3-20.

[^131]: Leonard, ‘Let My Software Go!’, p. 2.

[^132]: See Lewis Hyde, *The Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of
    Property,* London: Vintage, 1999; and Brass, Koziell and Searle,
    *Gathering Force*.

[^133]: See Georg Hegel, *Logic*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1873,
    pp. 141-142; and Marx, *Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts*, pp.
    98-114.

[^134]: See Alfie Kohn, ‘Studies Find Reward Often No Motivator’, Free
    Software Foundation, 19 January 1987,
    http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/motivation.html; and Leonard, ‘Let My
    Software Go!’.

[^135]: Alexandre Kojève, *Introduction to the Reading of Hegel*:
    *Lectures on the Phenomenology of the Spirit*, Ithaca: Cornell
    University Press, 1969, p. 230.

[^136]: See Michael Cusumano and David Yoffie, *Competing on Internet
    Time: Lessons from Netscape and its Battle Against Microsoft*, New
    York: Free Press, 1998; and Leonard, ‘The *Really* New Economy’.

[^137]: See John Perry Barlow, ‘The Economy of Ideas: A Framework for
    Rethinking Patents and Copyrights in the Digital Age (Everything You
    Know About Digital Property is Wrong)’, *Wired* 2:3 (March 1994),
    pp. 84-90 and 126-129,
    http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/2.03/economy.ideas.html.

[^138]: Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*, pp.
    21-22.
